---
layout: contact
---

# Minutes of the 3rd meeting of the Scala Center, Q4 2016

Minutes are archived
[on the Scala Center website](https://scala.epfl.ch/records.html).

## Summary

The following agenda was distributed to attendees:
[agenda](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/agendas/003-2016-q4.md).

Morgan Stanley has joined the board.  The company was represented at
this meeting by James Belsey.

Lars Hupel was ratified as a second community representative on the
board.

Scala Center activities for the past quarter included progress on the MOOCs, Scalafix, scalajs-bundler, SIPs, the new Scala Platform Process, Spores, Scala Native, Scastie, Scaladex, hackathons, and a new code of conduct.

The following proposals were voted on and adopted:

* [SCP-007](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/007-collections.md): Collaborative redesign and implementation of Scala 2.13's collections library
* [SCP-008](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/008-websites.md): Maintain scala-lang, docs.scala-lang, scala.epfl.ch websites
* [SCP-009](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/009-improve-direct-dependency-experience.md): Improve user experience for builds that use only direct dependencies

## Date, Time and Location

The meeting took place virtually, via UberConference, at 6:00pm
(Lausanne time) on Wednesday, November 30, 2016.

Minutes were taken by Seth Tisue (secretary).

## Attendees

### Attendees present

The following new board members were present:

- James Belsey, Morgan Stanley
- Lars Hupel, community/Typelevel

Other board members and officers present:

- Jeff Olchovy, Tapad
- Jonathan Perry, Goldman Sachs
- Adriaan Moors, Lightbend
- Stu Hood, Twitter
- Raúl Raja, 47 Degrees
- Tim Perrett, Verizon
- Roland Tritsch, Nitro
- Frederick Reiss, IBM
- Thomas Gawlitza, SAP
- Bill Venners, community/Artima

For the Scala Center:

- Jon Pretty, Propensive
- Heather Miller, EPFL
- Martin Odersky, EPFL

Also present:

- Eugene Burmako, Twitter
- Seth Tisue, Lightbend

## Proceedings

### Opening Remarks

As chairperson, Jon Pretty conducted the meeting, made the opening
remarks, and asked all participants to introduce themselves,
including the following new board members:

* **James Belsey** leads an infrastructure group at Morgan Stanley.
  Their codebase includes about two million lines of Scala.

Also present for the first time:

* **Eugene Burmako** is now at Twitter, formerly at EPFL.  He attended
  to help present Twitter's proposal on dependency handling in the
  Scala compiler (SCP-009).
* **Lars Hupel** is a Ph.D. student and is active in
  [Typelevel](http://typelevel.org), a Scala community organization.

At the last meeting, the board had agreed to invite Erik Osheim from
Typelevel to join the board as a second community representative.
Erik declined on grounds of insufficient time. Typelevel, after public
discussion, proposed Lars Hupel instead.

After the opening remarks, a vote was held on whether to ratify Lars.
This was approved unanimously by those voting.  (In the interest of
time, the vote was cut short once a majority was reached.)

### Reports

#### Scala Center Activities

As Executive Director, Heather Miller summarized Scala Center
activities since the last meeting.

Staffing levels at the Scala Center are currently as follows.  Julien
Richard-Foy, Guillaume Massé, and Jorge Vicente Cantero are full-time;
Ólafur Geirsson is at 65% time; Heather is at 20% time.

The Center has been trying to hire an additional engineer, but has not
succeeded yet.

Main areas of progress since the last meeting:

* Ólafur released a first version of Scalafix, a tool for migrating
  Scala code to new versions of the language, including Dotty; see
  [blog post](http://www.scala-lang.org/blog/2016/10/24/scalafix.html).
  This work has also involved contributing to Scalameta.
* Julien released scalajs-bundler, a new sbt plugin making it easy to
  use NPM dependencies in a Scala.js project; see
  [blog post](http://www.scala-lang.org/blog/2016/10/19/scalajs-bundler.html).
* Jorge has continued to push the Scala Improvement Process forward as
  Process Lead. Regular meetings have been occurring; multiple proposals
  have been considered; SIP-27 (trailing commas) has been accepted.
  Jorge has also announced the new Scala Platform Process (SPP), which
  replaces the old SLIP process; see
  [blog post](http://www.scala-lang.org/blog/2016/11/28/spp.html).
  An SPP committee of community members is now in place.
* Jorge released a new version of Spores, with improved support
  for Java serialization; see
  [blog post](http://www.scala-lang.org/blog/2016/11/30/spores-release.html).
* Guillaume has been working on cross-building support for Scala
  Native. He has also improved [Scastie](http://scastie.org) to
  support different back ends (Scala.js, Dotty, Scala Native) and has
  added Scaladex integration; see his
  [one minute demo video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IYRJ9hfdjfc).
  Scaladex integration with Sonatype and Coursier is in the works.

On the education and commmunity front:

* Heather and Julien are still working on the Spark MOOC; it is "very
  close" to being released.
* Julien has ported many exercises from the Center's MOOCs to the
  [Scala Exercises site](https://www.scala-exercises.org).
* Scala Ecosystem Hackathons were held at Scala World, Lambda World,
  and Scala Exchange.
* Heather is working on a
  [new Scala Code of Conduct](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1KqqdOywKWALUqJObM1Dglqe-n59C3bzxygd7RE8vYFY/edit?usp=sharing)
  (with Kelley Robinson, Erik Osheim, Stewart Stewart, and Seth
  Tisue).  Also in the works is moving Scala community discussion to
  two new Discourse sites (for [users](http://users.scala-lang.org)
  and [contributors](http://contributors.scala-lang.org)).

For more details on all this, see also Heather's own
[outline of her presentation](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1djcPYj-ylHb65B0UOm3oBrtN9g9LIi9wtqn-YAbbWKM/edit#).

There was some discussion of the scope of the new Scala Platform
Process, including the status of the Scala standard library, including
the collections.  It's expected that the collections redesign will be
part of the overall Scala 2.13 effort, rather than happening under the
SPP.  There is still a goal of further modularizing the standard
library itself, but it isn't being worked on yet.

#### Scala Center Financial Statement

See Heather's own
[outline](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1djcPYj-ylHb65B0UOm3oBrtN9g9LIi9wtqn-YAbbWKM/edit#)
for details and figures on the Center's financial situation.

Jon asked about the staffing situation at the Center, so before
discussing new proposals, the board can be aware what the resource
constraints are.  Heather says that assuming already promised funds
materialize, the Center plans to hire an additional one and a half
people.  If new members join the advisory board, that number could be
higher.

### Scala Center Proposals

Jon notes that all proposals made so far have been accepted.  He
observes that if this continues, the advisory board will undermine its
own influence, since if the Center is given more tasks than it can
achieve, the power to decide what gets worked on will shift away from
the board and towards the Center itself.

The proposals themselves are not summarized here; see the proposal
texts in the
[proposals](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/tree/main/proposals) directory.

#### Proposal SCP-007: Collaborative redesign and implementation of Scala 2.13's collections library

proposed by Lightbend, presented by Adriaan Moors

Discussion centered on hiring, given the proposed staffing level of
two Scala Center engineers at 80% time each, in addition to work done
by Lightbend engineers.  Heather emphasized that hiring for this might
be difficult given EPFL's constraints (including below-market
salaries).  Heather and Martin are exploring possible ways around that
but don't know yet if they will be successful.  Martin said he
expected to be directly involved personally with this effort and could
help mentor a developer at the Center (possibly Julien, said Heather).
Jon asked what the minimum possible staffing level would be; Adriaan
acknowledged that there is a possible "spectrum of ambition" for this
project.

A board member asked about Dotty.  Martin said that Dotty planned to
continue to use whatever standard library and collections Scala 2
uses, so this work would apply to Dotty as well.

**Outcome:** Approved, 8 to 4

#### Proposal SCP-008: Maintain scala-lang, docs.scala-lang, scala.epfl.ch websites

proposed by Lightbend, presented by Seth Tisue

Seth noted that the proposal was put out early for public feedback
which yielded good positive feedback and
[discussion](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/pull/11)
from the community.  A major theme of the community feedback was the
importance of having the Center not only make website improvements
directly, but also support and encourage community participation.
This was seconded by Stu.

Raúl said 47 Degrees hopes to provide direct assistance with this
effort.

Roland asked if the scope of the proposal could include marketing and
outreach for Scala more generally.  "Bad news travels fast, good news
maybe less so", so where can you go to hear the good news about Scala?
Sun used to do this for Java.  Lightbend has case studies on their
site, but many are now out of date.  Seth thought the staffing level
would have to be higher for much of that to happen at the Center, but
agreed it would be desirable.

Seth asked if the effort could be spread out among existing Scala
Center personnel, but Heather thinks that would not "play to the
strengths" of the current staff and hiring would really be much
better.  There was some discussion of how much actual writing might
be needed, as opposed to edits and maintenance, and discussion
of how much community participation can reasonably be hoped for.

Jon asked if there could or should be a separate proposal on Scala
documentation.  Heather thought there was still room for that.
It was agreed to keep it mostly as separate, possible future work.

**Outcome:** Approved, 8 to 2

#### Proposal SCP-009: Improve user experience for builds that use only direct dependencies

proposed by Twitter, presented by Stu Hood and Eugene Burmako

Stu emphasizes that the proposal should benefit any sufficiently large
Scala project and isn't tied to specific build systems (e.g. Pants or
Bazel) or codebase layouts (e.g. monorepos).  Large Java shops "are
used to" being able to compile against direct dependencies only;
Twitter wants to raise awareness that Scala lags in this respect and
that the situation could and should be improved.  Depending on the
available effort level, "the cost could be quite low" for the Center
to tackle the least ambitious version of the proposal.

Discussion centered on the issue of how many Scala users would
actually benefit from work in this area (with respect to repository
layout, binary vs. source dependencies, macro support in sbt,
transport of artifacts between build servers, and so on).

Adriaan agreed that progress could be made in this area without great
expense or a very high level of compiler expertise.  Eugene offered
to help mentor whoever works on this.

It was agreed that for now, the board would vote only on allocating up
to three months of engineering effort towards this, centered on point
3 of the proposal, with the rest being left as possible future work.

**Outcome:** Approved, 6 to 4

### Other business

Jon noted that past proposals were assigned conflicting numbers; but
this has now been resolved by
[this pull request](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/pull/14).

Heather agreed to set up a mailing list for advisory board members,
for logistics and so private discussion can happen in advance of
meetings.  Several people emphasized that regardless, discussion
should be public as much as possible (on pull requests in the
[advisoryboard repository](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/pulls)).

Bill said that the community input he has received this quarter,
which was primarily about 1) migration to Dotty, 2) Scala licensing,
and 3) the website and documentation work, has already been covered
by existing proposals.

Lars raised the following concerns:

* There is still interest in the possibility of changing the Scala
  license.  Could we get a response from EPFL about patent issues?
* There are ongoing concerns about the legitimacy of the Scala Center
  as an institution. Are they de facto gate keepers of the language,
  or just another open source entity? The board could work on
  clarifying that and shaping the outside view of the Center.

We expect to return to these topics at a future meeting -- especially
if they are raised in the form of proposals.

### Closing remarks

Jon noted that although all proposals were again accepted, the board
succeeded in limiting their scope to within what Heather thought can
be accomplished assuming promised funds arrive and hiring efforts are
successful.

The Q1 2017 meeting will be scheduled later.
