---
layout: contact
---

# Minutes of the 11th meeting of the Scala Center, Q4 2018

Minutes are [archived](https://scala.epfl.ch/records.html) on the
Scala Center website.

## Summary

The following agenda was distributed to attendees:
[agenda](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/agendas/011-2018-q4.md).

Spotify has joined the advisory board.  Julien Tournay is
their representative.

After this meeting, Lars Hupel is stepping down as community
representative.  A replacement has yet to be nominated.

Scala Center activities for the past quarter focused on
Coursier, Almond (formerly Jupyter-Scala), Bloop and BSP,
Zinc, build pipelining, 2.13 collections, Dotty, Metals,
Scalameta, Scalafix, Scala.js, SIP meetings, MOOCs,
Scala Days 2019, and ScalaIO.

Full details on these activities are in
[Sébastien's report](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1MwzPQtYIaJ4_5z7-StJI-gKiY-oV_6Or7PEvnJBR92k/edit?usp=sharing).

Other topics discussed at the meeting included the Center's
sponsorship terms.

Two new proposals were made:

* [SCP-019](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/019-scala-214-30-back-compat.md): Focusing on backwards compatibility for Scala 2.14 and Scala 3.0 (Twitter)
    * voted on, not accepted
* [SCP-020](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/020-sbt-transitive-dependencies-conflicts.md): SBT transitive dependency conflicts management improvements (Spotify)
    * voted on and accepted

SCP-20 was exceptionally accepted as a late submission
from Spotify, as they were only confirmed as board members
between the submission deadline and the meeting.

## Date, Time and Location

The meeting took place virtually, via Google Meet, on Wednesday,
December 5, 2018 at 3:30pm (GMT).

Minutes were taken by Seth Tisue (secretary).

## Attendees

Board members present:

- James Belsey, Morgan Stanley
- Eugene Burmako and Stu Hood, Twitter
- Lars Hupel, community/Typelevel
- Olga Makhasoeva, 47 Degrees
- Adriaan Moors, Lightbend
- Jonathan Perry, Goldman Sachs
- Frederick Reiss, IBM
- Julien Tournay, Spotify
- Mark Waks (a.k.a. Justin du Coeur), community/Artima, on behalf of Bill Venners

Apologies:

- Thomas Gawlitza, SAP

Officers:

- Sébastien Doeraene (director), EPFL
- Jon Pretty (chairperson), Propensive
- Martin Odersky (technical advisor), EPFL
- Seth Tisue (secretary), Lightbend

## Proceedings

As chairperson, Jon Pretty conducted the meeting.

He welcomed Spotify as the newest advisory board member, and Julien
Tournay as their representative.  Julien works for Spotify in Sweden.

Jon also welcomed Olga Makhasoeva as 47 Degrees' new representative
on the board.

Filling in for Bill Venners at this meeting was Mark Waks, Bill's
colleague at Artima.

### Activities

As the Center's Executive Director, Sébastien Doeraene summarized
Scala Center activities since the last meeting.

Most of Sébastien's remarks were based on his
[detailed report](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1MwzPQtYIaJ4_5z7-StJI-gKiY-oV_6Or7PEvnJBR92k/edit?usp=sharing)
on the Center's recent activities.

The following notes are a supplement to Sébastien's report:

Coursier isn't itself new, but it is a new project for the Scala
Center.  Alexandre Archambault, who is now a full-time engineer at the
Scala Center, is Coursier's original open-source developer.  Seb
highlighted Alex's plan to add publishing support to Coursier and
eventually integrate Coursier into sbt more directly as a faster
replacement for Ivy.  "It's a big enabler" of productivity, "basic
speeds of day-to-day tools" that Scala developers use.  A new
documentation site for Coursier will be released "soon".

Martin Duhemm has left the Scala Center.  The Dotty IDE work described
in Seb's report was Martin's last project.

Seb's report covers two different IDE projects, namely Dotty IDE and
Metals.  Unlike Dotty IDE, Metals aims to support Scala 2. The two
projects' features and UI "will be reconciled in the coming months,"
says Seb.  Metals "doesn't have a lot of features" yet but "the
features it has are really polished" and "it's really simple to
install and to import projects."  The goal is to add features
gradually, "to do one thing at a time but do it really well."

Jon asked what quality level that Metals has attained so far.  Seb
said that the handling of compiler diagnostics is already "perfect".
The go-to-definition feature has good test coverage, but users may
still uncover unknown bugs.  Importing builds, via Bloop, may fail on
especially complex builds.  Julien offered that Metals "worked
perfectly" so far on a 20-module project he's been trying it with,
though it "takes a while" to initialize.

Jon asked about Scala Days sponsorships.  Seb said that interested
sponsors should get in touch with Darja at the Scala Center.

Eugene asked what's next for build pipelining.  Seb said that Jorge
will continue to work on it, next steps in that work include support
for incremental compilation and mixed Scala/Java codebases.  "Once
it's usable for incremental compilation we'll make a bigger fuss about
it and advertise it much more widely," said Seb.

Eugene also asked about the status of Dotty IDE.  Seb returned to the
question of aligning the work on Dotty IDE with the work on Metals.
In many ways they are similar (for example, they are both LSP based
and both integrate with VS Code and other editors).  But right now the
user must install "one or the other", installing both tends to "not
quite work."  These projects need to become "one concerted effort"
with a single unified download, which would then operate in either
Scala 2 or Dotty mode depending on what kind of project you have.

Stu asked about the status of
[SCP-018](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/018-converging-214-30.md)
("Converging the Intermediate Representation of Scala 2.14 and Scala
3.0"), "was anyone assigned to work on that yet?"  Seb said the Center
is looking for "a new person we could assign this project to."  (If a
new person can't start soon, someone else might be assigned in the
meantime.)

### Financial report

"We got the final numbers for the MOOC income for Q1 through Q3 of
2018," said Seb.  This totaled just under 300K CHF, of which the
Center's share is 215K CHF.  (The CHF/USD exchange rate is currently
1-to-1.)  This is similar to past proceeds, so that part of the budget
is "stable".

With Spotify joining the board, there are now eight member companies.
There may be enough budget to open an additional position, besides the
one vacated by Martin Duhemm, but it's not certain yet.

Jon asked if there was any possibility of using extra money to
increase salaries, to help ensure retention of engineers.  Seb said
that EPFL's rules around compensation are so strict that there's
really no leeway.

Jon also asked if the Scala Days 2019 (in Lausanne) has any financial
risks or financial opportunities for the Center.  Seb said that "the
finances of Scala Days are a completely separate budget".  Because
there is only one Scala Days in 2019, a larger hall was obtained, on
the assumption that attendance will be higher than two separate
conferences on either side of the Atlantic.  The break-even point is
900 attendees, which is not very many more than attended Scala Days
Berlin in 2018.

### Proposals

Both proposals were presented and discussed before either proposal was voted on.

#### SCP-019: Focusing on backwards compatibility for Scala 2.14 and Scala 3.0

Proposed by Stu Hood on behalf of Twitter.

The theme of the proposal is the relative priority, during the transition
of Scala 3, of backward compatibility (Scala 3's ability to consume
libraries built using Scala 2) versus forward compatibility (Scala 2's
ability to consume libraries built using Scala 3).

See the [proposal text](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/019-scala-214-30-back-compat.md)
for details.

There was some discussion on the [pull request for the
proposal](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/pull/44)

between Martin and Stu. This resulted in some [revisions to the
proposal](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/pull/47)
shortly before the meeting.  These changes are included in the
proposal text linked above, and the updated version is also what the
board finally voted on.

In presenting the proposal, Stu noted that an alternative to forward
compatibility already exists, namely cross-compilation.  "Libraries
can do what they already do," namely cross-compile and cross-publish,
in this case against both Scala 2 and 3, as long as they only use the
common subset of the language (which encompasses nearly everything in
Scala 2).

"This is not an anti-TASTy proposal", Stu said.  "This is a proposal
to use whatever means necessary to allow backwards compatibility."  If
Scala 3's support for Scala 2's pickle format is good enough to get
good backward compatibility, then so be it.  But if Scala 2 emitting
TASTy turns out to be a better way to achieve backward compat, then so
be it also.  (Whereas Scala 2.14's proposed ability to _consume_ TASTy
is less relevant to backwards compat.)

Martin commented on the proposal.  He described Dotty's already
existing Scala 2 pickle support as "a solved problem."  "Every Dotty
program ever written uses Scala 2 pickle support" and it's never been
a problem, so Martin hopes that the backward compatibility problem is
actually already solved, but does that still need to be validated
further?  To more fully validate it, we need to test it with "a lot of
code".  There are two ways to get that much code, one is to wait for
the community to catch up and write a lot of Scala 3 code, but that
takes a long time.  Or you port a lot of existing Scala 2 code, but
that takes effort, especially for porting macros, but also (for
example) if the code hits differences in type inference.  The Scala
Center can help Scala 2 projects port their code when the time comes,
but in the meantime there isn't anything to do to improve binary
compatibility, so Martin sees no need to do deprioritize the
forward-compatibility parts of SCP-018.

Jon asked Adriaan what the impact on Lightbend's 2.14 efforts would
be.  Adriaan addressed that and also commented more generally on the
new proposal. "The key point is that forward compatibility is also
important" for Scala 3 "because in order to identify potential
challenges with Scala 3, we need to be able to link both ways.
Applications might not upgrade to Scala 3 right away, but libraries
may be eager to upgrade."

Adriaan also said that SCP-018 was intentionally "pretty vague" about
the exact nature of the best path forward.  "It's the task of the Scala
Center" to figure out exactly what to do, depending on what engineers
are available, and any other factors that arise as the work progresses.
Seb agreed that this new proposal (SCP-019) "is directing, more than
usual, what the Center should do and how we should do it."

Eugene asked what barriers exist, or are expected to exist, for
cross-compiling libraries against Scala 2 and Scala 3.  Understanding
that better could help identify the best approach to compatibility.
Stu added that the Dotty community build is currently "leaf nodes",
that is, libraries with few or no dependencies.  We won't know more
about compatibility until it's expanded to cover inter-library
dependencies better.  And Jon observed that we need to test
applications that depend on the libraries, too.

Martin says the blocker, currently, for expanding the scope of the
Dotty community build is macros.  "Transitive dependencies using
macros are absolutely everywhere as you go up the stack. That's
why it's so difficult. Bottom dependencies need to be adapted to
use new-style macros" before we can test downstream projects.
So yes "there are porting problems", but "they are not related to
binary compatibility. Macros are the problem."  But if the Scala
Center can identify key macro-based libraries and help port them,
that will be a "big win".

Mark added that ScalaTest is currently being ported to Dotty, so that
will be a "big, chewy test" of a widely-used library that is
macro-based.  He also mentioned that we need to keep in mind that the
world of Scala development at companies is very different than what we
see in the open-source world.  For example, relatively few companies
are writing their own macros, even though open-source macro-based
libraries are widely used everywhere.  So we'll need to keep that in
mind when gathering data on compatibility.

Martin agrees with Stu that producing a "compatibility reference" is
needed, so that the community has the information it needs to
cross-compile and/or cross-consume between Scala 2 and 3, but he sees
producing this as primarily LAMP's and Lightbend's job, rather than
primarily the Scala Center's job.

Seb explained some the motivation for valuing forward compatibility,
as he sees it, though "not taking sides". He explained, "If we only
support 3 depends on 2, but not the other way around, then library
developers are stuck on 2 for the next 5 years, since if their
codebase must cross-compile, they cannot benefit from Scala 3's
features.  That means that in practice, the visible Scala ecosystem
would remain on Scala 2 for a long time, and that could send a
worrying message to the public."  Martin seconded this.  He said most
of the users he talks to who are worried about Scala 3 are worried
about slow adoption, but then the forward-compatibility part of
SCP-018 strongly reassures them.

Some complex discussion about macros and the overall compatibility
followed, difficult to summarize.  The key point is that neither
forward compatibility nor backwards compatibility provide macros
that work across both Scala 2 and Scala 3.

It's clear that library authors and users will need guidance to
understand what will or won't work in what scenarios, and when it
matters how macros are involved.

Jon noted that even if SCP-019 isn't accepted, that doesn't close the
door on other future proposals aimed at refining SCP-018, as the
overall Scala 3 situation develops further.

**Voting**: three in favor, four opposed (with Seb casting the
tie-breaking vote, and promising to "take the proposal into account"
regardless), three abstentions, one member not present. The proposal
is not accepted.

#### SCP-020: SBT transitive dependency conflicts management improvements

Proposed by Julien Tournay on behalf of Spotify.

See the [proposal text](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/020-sbt-transitive-dependencies-conflicts.md)
for details.

In presenting the proposal, Julien said that library version conflicts
have been a recurring problem in deploying code at Spotify.  Sometimes
"we only realize there is a conflict when we run our data pipelines,"
sometimes not until after the job has been running for hours.

Lars asked to what extent the proposed work on sbt should overlap or
interact with the work the Center is now doing on Coursier.

Julien said that Coursier isn't the default in sbt, so for now, "most
builds" would have the same issue even if it were fixed in Coursier.
But if Coursier fixes it and also becomes the de facto standard for Scala
builds, then yes, "done."

Seb observed that sbt does already print eviction warnings.  Lars
asked how a build tool can do better than that, given the lack of an
accepted standard way for libraries to signal binary
compatibility. Not all libraries use semantic versioning, or do it the
same way.  "The reason I sound pessimistic," said Lars, "is that I'm
concerned about false positives," a tool reporting conflicts where no
incompatibility exists.  But the proposals seems to give "leeway" to
the Scala Center to do whatever's feasible and helpful.

Seb suggested perhaps adding a "2b", between levels 2 and 3 in the
proposal, which would involve "a more elaborate API for conflict
resolution", since `ConflictManager`, even if it worked perfectly as
designed, arguably isn't a flexible enough mechanism, for the same
reasons that Lars brought up: "you want to resolve conflicts in a
different way for different libraries."

Mark spoke up in support of the proposal, because the problem is real,
and the proposal gives the Scala Center flexibility to choose how to
address it. "At least level 1 would totally be helpful."  Perhaps
plugins such as sbt-dependency-graph could become part of sbt.

Jonathan and James both expressed some doubt about the usefulness, in
their shops at least, of upping the overall level of "intricacy"
around dependencies, especially in polyglot environments, by
introducing yet more conflict resolution rules and mechanisms.

**Voting**: seven in favor, one opposed, one abstention,
one member not present. The proposal is accepted.

### Community feedback

Lars Hupel announced that he is stepping down as community
representative; Jon thanked him for his more than two years of
service.  A replacement has yet to be nominated.  (Last time around,
the spot was offered to Typelevel to fill; Jon anticipated that
happening again, but it's up to the board.)

Mark said that "he's glad to see a focus on tooling, since that is still
the thing that comes up most often" in his conversations with community
members.

### Other business

At the previous meeting, there was some discussion about perhaps
changing the Center's sponsorship terms.  Jon asked Seb if this has
been considered further yet, and also asked if it would be good to
create a concept of a "developer sponsor" who would pay a smaller fee
but make up for it by contributing development work directly.  But the
board agreed there wasn't really time to discuss it.  James asked if
the Center could make specific suggestions, to be voted on at the next
meeting.  Seb agreed to raise the topic on the board's mailing list,
for discussion in advance of the next meeting.

## Conclusion

Jon said that as usual, the next meeting will be in approximately
three months, perhaps early March.  Then the meeting after that will
be held in Lausanne, in conjunction with Scala Days.
