---
layout: contact
---

# Minutes of the 8th meeting of the Scala Center, Q1 2018

Minutes are [archived](https://scala.epfl.ch/records.html) on the
Scala Center website.

## Summary

The following agenda was distributed to attendees:
[agenda](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/agendas/008-2018-q1.md).

Scala Center activities for the past quarter focused on MOOCs,
scalajs-bundler, collections, Build Server Protocol (BSP), Scala
Native tooling API, Scala Platform Process (SPP), Scala Improvement
Process (SIP), Scala compiler performance and profiling, Zinc,
Scalameta, Scalafix, and Scala Days program organization.

Full details on these activities are in
[Heather's report](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BT_FZyFC90ShyfhwfdSq_NlXIVT_eXHYip3bl8LD6Sw/edit?usp=sharing).

Other topics discussed at the meeting included macros, governance,
Scala 3, and the planned Scala contributors summit in Berlin.

Two new proposals were made:

* [SCP-016](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/016-verbal-descriptions.md): Accessible Scala (community)
    * voted on and accepted
* [SCP-017](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/017-lsp-stp-wg-support.md): Support for LSP and STP Working Groups (Twitter)
    * voted on and accepted

## Date, Time and Location

The meeting took place virtually, via Google Meet, at 4:00pm
(UTC) on Friday, March 16, 2018.

Minutes were taken by Seth Tisue (secretary).

## Attendees

### Attendees present

Board members:

- James Belsey, Morgan Stanley
- Francisco Díaz, 47 Degrees (filling in for Raúl Raja Martínez)
- Thomas Gawlitza, SAP
- Stu Hood, Twitter
- Lars Hupel, community/Typelevel
- Adriaan Moors, Lightbend
- Frederick Reiss, IBM
- Haripriya Srinivasaraghavan, Verizon
- Arnaud Payement, Goldman Sachs (filling in for Jonathan Perry)
- Bill Venners, community/Artima

Also:

- Rui Batista, e.near
- Eugene Burmako, Twitter

Officers:

- Heather Miller (director), EPFL
- Jon Pretty (chairperson), Propensive
- Martin Odersky (technical advisor), EPFL
- Seth Tisue (secretary), Lightbend

## Proceedings

As chairperson, Jon Pretty conducted the meeting.

### Activities

As Executive Director, Heather Miller summarized Scala Center
activities since the last meeting.

Most of Heather's remarks were based on her
[detailed report](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BT_FZyFC90ShyfhwfdSq_NlXIVT_eXHYip3bl8LD6Sw/edit?usp=sharing)
on the Center's recent activities.

The following notes are a supplement to Heather's report.

Seth asked whether there's any prospect of the Dotty "Principled Meta
Programming" effort, which has replaced the Scala Center's previous
portable-macros effort, ever being backported to Scala 2.  Martin said
it's Scala 3 only.  The recommended migration strategy is for macro
authors to port their macros to the new system for Scala 3.  Jon
suggested that a blog post be published explaining this further.  Seth
praised the clarity of the new situation; the community had been
worried about having to rewrite their macros twice, once before Scala
3, and once after.

Lars asked if we're voting on the portable-macros effort being
dropped; the answer's no. James asked about the process involved, for
the board, in abandoning an approved proposal.  That's not clear, but
since no one is actually objecting, we didn't pursue that question
further.  Adriaan suggested that requesting a vote, and/or submitting
a followup proposal, both seem like plausible routes, should such a
situation arise in the future.

### Financial report

Verizon is leaving the board after this quarter.  Other than that, the
Center's financial situation remains unchanged since last quarter.

### Proposals

#### SCP-016: Accessible Scala

Proposed by Bill Venners and Lars Hupel on behalf of the FLOSS community.

The proposal was written by Sam Halliday, with input from Jon Pretty
and Rui Batista.

See the
[proposal text](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/016-verbal-descriptions.md)
for details.

Jon summarized the proposal for the board, and Rui Batista, a guest
at the meeting, explained how work on this would benefit him and other
Scala developers who are blind or partially-sighted.

Rui emphasized that there is an opportunity here to leverage Scala's
rich type system, as well of Scalameta's understanding of types, to
aid blind developers much more than existing systems for other
programming languages can do.

Jon mentioned that there is some existing work on GitHub, by a user
named Maxwell, that could give the effort a head start.

Heather addressed the issue of staffing.  She thinks the required
effort level is modest enough that the Center could reasonably fit it
in, and that Guillaume Massé would be a suitable engineer.

Lars asked Rui if he could estimate how much this tool might actually
speed his coding work up.  Rui declined to name a number, but offered
that the most dramatic speedup would come from an "outline" or
"overview" mode, that used its knowledge of code structure to avoid
having to read the entire file out loud.

**Voting**: all in favor, none opposed, no abstentions. The proposal
is accepted.

#### SCP-017: Support for LSP and STP Working Groups (Twitter)

Proposed by Stu Hood and Eugene Burmako (Twitter).

See the
[proposal text](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/017-lsp-stp-wg-support.md)
for details.

Eugene presented the proposal to the board. Jon and Heather discussed
the nature of the support that the Scala Center could provide to the
working groups; the proposal deliberately leaves that rather open.
Heather said that Jorge and Ólafur (but Jorge especially) would be the
engineers most involved.

Bill and James were unclear on the costs involved. Jon clarified that
the "Costs" section refers to *other* costs besides developer
effort.

But apart from that, Bill thought the effort level proposed seemed
surprisingly high.  Heather and Eugene clarified that the effort level
would involve some engineering work as well as just participating in
discussions.  Eugene described 5 developer days/week as only "a start"
at what it might take to tackle a problem this big.

James suggested that the board not commit to supporting a whole year
of that effort level, but reevaluate by re-voting in six months.  Stu
thought that sounded fine, and there were no objections from the rest
of the board, so that's the version of the proposal Jon put a vote.

Seth asked, at this point, whether Bloop work is covered by this
proposal.

Heather acknowledged that she isn't sure yet about Bloop's "niche",
but she thinks that any work that happens on Bloop can be "repurposed"
if necessary, depending on what the STP working group decides.

Also, Stu had asked, earlier in the meeting, for clarification on the
goals of Bloop.  Will users be confused by having a third tool
involved, in addition to their IDE and their build tool?  The success
of Bloop could depend on really good integration that smooths that
over.  Further discussion on this will occur in the working groups
themselves, of course.  Jon suspects that although Bloop currently has
its own "branding", it could end up "integrated" into something else.

Jon described the working groups as, in part, an "experiment" to see
whether "this approach to decision making" works.  Yes, some early
work on Bloop happened without much guidance from the board or the
groups, but if the groups are established, the work would continue in
that context.

Bill and Heather returned to the question of effort level -- does
the Center have enough engineers to do this?  As usual, accepted
proposals are recommendations, not commands; Heather thinks effort
levels on various projects can be adjusted as needed.

**Voting**: all in favor, none opposed, no abstentions. The proposal
is accepted.

### Other business

Bill didn't have any community feedback to relay. Lars had to leave
the meeting early.

Jon re-raised the governance question about the portable macros
effort.  Heather proposed that the advisory board meetings are the
right venue to re-discuss and perhaps re-vote when something like this
occurs.  Stu observed that the Center doesn't control the Dotty team;
external circumstances can change.  James thought "what we have is
fine", probably.  Three months can be a long cycle, but the advisory
board mailing list exists when communication needs to happen faster,
for example in the monthly updates sent there.  There seemed to be
general agreement that monthly is fast enough.

Jon observes that there tends to be a flurry of activity immediately
before meetings, which doesn't leave much time for thought and
discussion ahead of time.  The communication of the decision on macros
was an example of this.  We should try to break out of that pattern if
we can.  Perhaps by setting a proposal deadline longer before the
meeting?  But then what about counterproposals?  It's unclear how to
handle this.

Stu asked if there are forums the Scala Center uses for discussion
that board members could join as well, in addition to following GitHub
issues.  Heather said that some board members are restricted to email
for regulatory reasons, so it's not obvious what technology to use.
No conclusion on this was reached.

Martin shared plans for Scala 3: "it should come out shortly after
Scala 2.14."  Eugene asked about migration, especially macros.  Martin
mentioned Scalafix, and said it needs to be "accelerated" for Scala 3
migration purposes.  Macros are the "biggest worry", so the team needs
to take "controlled steps" in this area and not be "overly ambitious".
By the end of 2018 the story there should be clearer.  The Lightbend
team will focus on the 2.14 release, which will be "the best version
they can make to enable the migration".  The two teams will "work
from both sides" to make it happen and provide migration paths.

Heather announced that she is organizing a contributors summit after
Scala Days Berlin in June, to bring together people working on Scala
compilers, tooling, and libraries for roundtable discussions.  The
format will be based on the Go contributors summit.

### Conclusion

Planning of next meeting, can we have it at Scala Days NYC in June?
Most board members will be present, so we can have the meeting in
person, and anyone who can't make it can still attend remotely.  James
Belsey suggested meeting at Morgan Stanley's offices, so that's the
tentative plan.
