---
layout: contact
---

# Minutes of the 10th meeting of the Scala Center, Q3 2018

Minutes are [archived](https://scala.epfl.ch/records.html) on the
Scala Center website.

## Summary

The following agenda was distributed to attendees:
[agenda](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/agendas/010-2018-q3.md).

Sébastien Doeraene is the new director of the Scala Center.

Scala Center activities for the past quarter focused on MOOCs,
collections, scalajs-bundler, Bloop, pipelined compilation, Zinc,
compiler performance, Dotty tooling and IDE, Scalafix, Scalameta,
ScalaPB, conferences (including Scala Days), talks, open source
sprees, and the Scala Improvement Process (SIP).

Full details on these activities are in
[Sébastien's report](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Mt5l4ezX2NIODHjWTQpJcUYeDRGmO3k3SsvjXOrrqhA/edit?usp=sharing).

Other topics discussed at the meeting included forum moderation
and possible changes to how Center sponsorship works.

One new proposal was made:

* [SCP-018](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/018-converging-214-30.md): Converging the Intermediate Representation of Scala 2.14 and Scala 3.0 (Lightbend)
    * voted on and accepted

## Date, Time and Location

The meeting took place virtually, via Google Meet, on Friday,
September 21, 2018 at 4:00pm (GMT).

Minutes were taken by Seth Tisue (secretary).

## Attendees

Board members present:

- James Belsey, Morgan Stanley
- Eugene Burmako, Twitter
- Chris Davenport, community/Typelevel (filling in for Lars Hupel)
- Adriaan Moors, Lightbend
- Jonathan Perry, Goldman Sachs
- Bill Venners, community/Artima

Apologies:

- Thomas Gawlitza, SAP
- Raúl Raja Martínez, 47 Degrees
- Frederick Reiss, IBM

Officers:

- Sébastien Doeraene (director), EPFL
- Jon Pretty (chairperson), Propensive
- Martin Odersky (technical advisor), EPFL
- Seth Tisue (secretary), Lightbend

## Proceedings

As chairperson, Jon Pretty conducted the meeting.

### Activities

As the Center's new Executive Director, Sébastien Doeraene summarized
Scala Center activities since the last meeting.

Most of Sébastien's remarks were based on his
[detailed report](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Mt5l4ezX2NIODHjWTQpJcUYeDRGmO3k3SsvjXOrrqhA/edit?usp=sharing)
on the Center's recent activities.

The following notes are a supplement to Sébastien's report:

Julien said the collaboration with Roland and Konrad on the reactive
systems MOOC was "very effective" and he has been "very happy" with
the results so far.

Jorge provided some preliminary performance numbers for build
pipelining: Akka compiles 17% faster, Spark compiles 30% faster.

Ólafur says that the improved documentation in the Scalafix 0.8.0
release was praised on Twitter by a user who wrote some rules using
the new release.

In addition to the Scala open source sprees covered in the report, a
spree was also held in Gdańsk.  This spree was notable because it
happened with substantially less direct participation from the Scala
Center than any previous spree (only Jon was physically present).

Scala Days 2019 will be held at EPFL in Lausanne in June.  Because
it's at EPFL this time, Darja Jovanovic is doing much of the
organization work, in collaboration with Lightbend, others at EPFL,
and other parties.

Eugene asked about Martin Duhem's work on Dotty IDE. He asked whether
this work might also benefit Scala 2 users, and if so, when.
Sébastien said Ólafur has a plan for this that he intends to work
on next quarter, involving Metals and further work on Scalameta LSP.

### Financial report

Sébastien said the budget is "pretty much stable".  As before, the
seven advisory board members provide funding for three engineers, and
the MOOCs fund a fourth.

The MOOC funds have also now paid back the Scala Center's seed funds
that were used to bootstrap creation of the center.

MOOC funds since January 2018 have yet to arrive, but most of that
delay is normal.  There has been some additional delay because of the
changeover of directors.

### Proposals

#### SCP-018: Converging the Intermediate Representation of Scala 2.14 and Scala 3.0

Proposed by Adriaan Moors on behalf of Lightbend.

See the
[proposal text](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/018-converging-214-30.md)
for details.

Also, there was some discussion on the [pull request for the
proposal](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/pull/40)
between Adriaan, Eugene, and Guillaume Martres.

In presenting the proposal to the board, Adriaan noted that a prototype
implementation by Guillaume already exists, so the proposal is to put
more resources behind moving that forward.

Eugene re-raised the same questions from his comments on the
[pull request](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/pull/40).
He suggested that the prototype should be improved for one quarter,
as a trial, before the board commits any engineering resources for a
longer period.

Jon asked how much engineering effort is available at the Center to
work on this. Sébastien said that he's not sure if the current
engineering staff has enough compiler expertise to be fully effective
on this work.  He hopes to hire someone new for this.

Jon asked if the current engineers could be trained.  Sébastien said
yes, of course it's possible, just not ideal.

Adriaan points out that this would be a collaborative effort with
Lightbend and LAMP, so much of the compiler expertise would come from
there.  He believes the work could be divided appropriately among the
involved parties to make this work, regardless of whom from the Scala
Center is put on the project.  (It helps that Adriaan is now based at
the Lightbend office in Lausanne, which is across the street from the
Scala Center.)

Adriaan hopes that the two compilers' back ends could be aligned
closely enough to produce the same bytecode for nearly all code.  That
isn't the focus of this proposal, but the TASTY work will be easier
the more the two back ends can be aligned.

James asked if the shared back end could ultimately be kept in a
single shared repo.  If the Scala 2 teams makes a back end change, how
would they know if their change breaks Dotty?  Adriaan said he could
"definitely see" a shared repo happening, though it's "on the more
ambitious side of the spectrum" of possible outcomes.  Perhaps a CI
workflow involving multiple repos could be an equivalent solution.

Jon asked what would happen if the proposal were rejected, what
interoperability picture between Scala 2 and 3 would result.  Martin
answered that without Scala Center help the story "looks bleak",
because LAMP cannot pick up the slack, and Lightbend cannot do all the
work on this without delaying Scala 3 substantially, there is too much
else to do for 2.14.  Jon asked for clarification: "If we didn't do
this, that would mean that Dotty could depend on Scala 2 projects
using Scala signatures, but not the other way around?" Adriaan said
yes. Martin added that as a result "migration would have to be bottom
up, you couldn't migrate anything from Scala 2 to Scala 3 unless all
your dependencies have migrated, and you'd need dual builds for the
whole duration, because as long as you still had Scala 2 clients,
you'd need a Scala 2 build, so it would complicate [ecosystem
migration] greatly".  Sébastien agreed that doing this work would
substantially decrease the risk of a difficult community transition to
Scala 3.

Eugene asked if it would be feasible for the Scala 2 compiler to read
TASTY but not generate it, would that remove the risk?  Martin
responded that reading them is actually harder than writing them.
"The unpickler is larger than the pickler", and "Scala 2 would have to
deal with all the Dotty features", at least well enough (Adriaan
added) to link against them. Martin: "Once you've understood the
necessary transformations, it's relatively easy to do both reading
and writing, and that would be useful for testing, for example
that the round trip is the identity."  Adriaan added that both
compilers still need to generate bytecode, so if both back ends
aren't TASTY based, that creates risks of incompatibilities.

Eugene asked to what extent the proposed Scala 2 TASTY writer would
need to be exactly aligned with the TASTY the Scala 3 compiler
outputs; harmonizing these outputs could be "the biggest complexity"?
He added that he's been facing similar issues in the work on rsc at
Twitter, and he's found that "reading just the signatures simplifies
things very much."

Adriaan allowed that the lower-effort path Eugene suggests is
feasible, but added that there are long-term, bigger-pictures around
parallel maintenance of Scala 2 and Scala 3 until Scala 2's end of
life, which won't come until Scala 3 has been out for some time.

Martin questioned whether leaving out the method bodies would save
that much effort, given that most of the differences between Scala 2
and 3 are in the type system, and all of the type system is present
in signatures.  Sébastien concurred; "it doesn't matter" if the two
compilers emit the same bodies.  (Adriaan had mentioned this earlier
as a possible goal, but not a necessary goal.)

Adriaan acknowledges that these questions aren't settled yet, but he
thinks that arriving at a final design through a process of
investigation is covered under the proposal, the proposal doesn't fix
the final design.

Jon asked Eugene if a shared back end would benefit the rsc project.
Eugene said maybe, it's a longer term question.  "When we get to that
point, we will investigate."

James asked Adriaan if he agreed with Eugene's suggestion of doing a
one-quarter trial first.  Adriaan said yes, that's reasonable.  "It's
always good to keep re-evaluating."  But it interacts with the
questions of hiring and training; if someone needs to come up to
speed, it might (for example) take two quarters instead of one to get
far enough to even evaluate.

Chris asked what the success conditions of the initial trial period
would be.  Sébastien said the initial focus would be on the shared
subset of the two language versions, support for 2-only and 3-only
features could come later, just supporting the shared subset would
be useful already.  "I would be happy if we get to that point,"
Adriaan said; James and Sébastien agreed.

After some discussion, the board agreed to vote first on the 1-year
version, and then if the vote failed, vote again on a 1-quarter
version.

**Voting**: five in favor, one opposed (Twitter), no abstentions,
three members not present. Since the first vote passed, there
was no need for a second vote.  The proposal is accepted.

### Other business

#### Forum moderation

Two board members had asked Jon before the meeting about recent
moderation incidents on official Scala forums, under the [Scala Code
of Conduct](https://www.scala-lang.org/conduct/).  Jon now raised the
issue before the board.

Some of the ensuing discussion involved names of individuals and
details of particular incidents.  These minutes will stick to more
general descriptions.

Shortly before the meeting, Sébastien posted the following public
statement on the matter:
https://contributors.scala-lang.org/t/looking-for-a-moderation-process-to-enforce-the-coc/2330
The statement briefly summarized one of the recent incidents,
including noting that the temporary bans that were made were now
lifted.  It also proposed some changes to how moderation is handled
and asked for community input.

There was discussion of whether sufficient evidence is being provided
when warnings and bans are issued.  In the recent cases, not all of
the relevant evidence still exists.  Sébastien's statement addresses
this by proposing better recordkeeping, and he repeated this in the
meeting.  We also discussed recent events until everyone felt they
were clearer on what had happened.

Martin stated support for the moderators.  "People take this on as a
service to the community," even though "it's really difficult and
unrewarding work."  Still, "if we can improve our handling we should
do that."

#### Funding

Jon reminded us there was discussion at the June meeting about
possible changes to the Center's funding structure, but that hasn't
moved forward since, presumably because of the change of directors.

Sébastien said this is still on his mind, and he has begun looking at
what other open source foundations are doing.  As we discussed last
time, the Center does have two sponsorship tiers, but the lower tier
doesn't give much benefit to the company (no votes), and so far only
one company (Oracle) has signed up.

It's apparently common elsewhere to have multiple levels of
sponsorship, typically depending on the company's size, but with
better benefits offered to smaller companies.

James asked why there's been so little interest in the existing lower
sponsorship tier.  Why isn't clear, but regardless, it indicates that
a change is probably warranted.  Perhaps, James suggested, the Center
could approach some smaller companies directly and ask them what would
interest them.

### Community feedback

In this part of the meeting, Bill and Chris both made further comments
about the moderation issues.

Bill stated that "you need moderation" in open source.  Without it "a
lot of damage" can result.  But "when you give someone bad feedback,
it's important to have examples, so it's good to keep track of that
stuff."

Chris noted that Typelevel has adopted the Scala Code of Conduct as
well.  Many Typelevel projects have changed or are considering
changing from the old Typelevel code to the Scala code.  Any
improved handling of moderation is of interest to them as well.

Jon asked why change codes. Chris characterized the old code as "don't
do bad things", while the new code is more about creating a positive
environment.

Bill also relayed community support for attention to migration (with
SCP-018 as an example of that).  "The most important thing people deal
with is versions and upgrading and migration. That's been our
experience on ScalaTest. Anything that can help us get from version to
version of Scala" is very important.

## Conclusion

Several board members were unable to be present at this meeting.  Jon
will try to schedule the next meeting farther in advance this time to
prevent this from happening again.

The next meeting will be virtual and will likely be held in early
December, even though that's less than three months away, to avoid
conflicting with holidays.
