---
layout: contact
---

# Minutes of the 9th meeting of the Scala Center, Q2 2018

Minutes are [archived](https://scala.epfl.ch/records.html) on the
Scala Center website.

## Summary

The following agenda was distributed to attendees:
[agenda](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/agendas/009-2018-q2.md).

Scala Center activities for the past quarter focused on Bloop, BSP,
pipelined compilation, scalac-profiling, Zinc, Scalameta, SemanticDB,
Scalafix, Dotty, Scala Native, sbt load-plugin, collections,
scalajs-bundler, Accessible Scala, MOOCs, talks, open source sprees,
conferences, and the Scala Improvement Process (SIP).

Full details on these activities are in
[Heather's report](../2018-06-19-june-19-2018.pdf).

Other topics discussed at the meeting included Scala 2.13 and Scala 3
migration, enforcing coding style guidelines, progress on tooling,
web site maintenance, and metaprogramming plans for Scala 3.

No new proposals were made this quarter.

## Date, Time and Location

The meeting took place at Morgan Stanley's offices in New York City,
on Tuesday, June 19, 2018 at 1:00pm local time.  Most attendees were
present in person but several participated virtually via conference call.

Minutes were taken by Seth Tisue (secretary).

There was no recording of the meeting this time, so I had to rely on
my notes.  I apologize for any resulting omissions or inaccuracies.

## Attendees

Board members present:

- James Belsey, Morgan Stanley
- Eugene Burmako, Twitter
- Thomas Gawlitza, SAP
- Lars Hupel, community/Typelevel
- Adriaan Moors, Lightbend
- Juan Pedro Moreno, 47 Degrees
- Jonathan Perry, Goldman Sachs
- Frederick Reiss, IBM
- Bill Venners, community/Artima

Also:

- Sébastien Doeraene, EPFL

Officers:

- Heather Miller (director), EPFL
- Jon Pretty (chairperson), Propensive
- Martin Odersky (technical advisor), EPFL
- Seth Tisue (secretary), Lightbend

## Proceedings

As chairperson, Jon Pretty conducted the meeting.

### Activities

As Executive Director, Heather Miller summarized Scala Center
activities since the last meeting.

Heather's remarks were based on her
[detailed report](../2018-06-19-june-19-2018.pdf)
on the Center's recent activities.

The report includes links to a number of blog posts written
by Scala Center engineers about their recent activities and
collaborations.

The following notes are a supplement to Heather's report.

The Bloop work will also be presented at at Scala Days.

Julien is working with Roland Kuhn (former Lightbend) and Konrad
Malawski (Lightbend) on reviving the reactive MOOC (covering
topics including typed actors and reactive streams).

Bill asked if the MOOCs still popular. Heather said yes, "way more
popular than ever", in fact. Making the courses available anytime, not
just on particular start dates, really helped the numbers.

Seth asked if enough students been through the OpenEdX versions of the
courses to be sure they are as solid as the Coursera versions.
Heather said those numbers are only in the hundreds so far.  Seth
asked if the Center plans to push people more towards OpenEdX.
Heather said no, it's more of a backup plan, we aren't trying to
discourage Coursera use.

Eugene asked why the old collections didn't go through a deprecation
cycle first, with an intermediate period with both versions remaining
available in at least one Scala version.  Adriaan and Seth explained
that doing it that way simply wasn't practical.  Jon pointed out that
since the collections changes are the centerpiece of 2.13, other kinds
of disruption were kept to a minimum in 2.13.  It's a "library release",
rather than a "compiler release" like 2.12.

Heather mentioned that in the "Accessible Scala" demo video linked
from the notes uses "the Ubuntu voice" which "isn't that good", she
said the voice on Mac is a lot better.

Scala Spree "is gaining momentum", one hosted by Tapad was happening
down the street literally as we were meeting.  Many Scala conferences
this year have hosted Sprees.  "A zillion... 40?" people came to the
Scala Days one.

The Scala Contributors Summit happened the day after Scala Days in
Berlin. Heather thinks the attendes arrived at some better
understandings on collaborative work.

Jon expressed optimism about the recent Zinc and Bloop work resulting
in noticeable speed gains on real projects.

Darja Jovanovic, assuming no glitch occurs in the hiring process at
EPFL, will be continuing to work on SIP and SPP and the Sprees and so
forth.

### Financial report

There is an engineering hire in the works, expected to be completed
in the fall.

There is no other change since other recent meetings.  The Center
neither lost nor gained advisory board members this quarter (since
Verizon left last quarter).

Jon asked if we should increase the fee for advisory board members, to
increase available funds.  There was some concern whether for some
members, this might cause delays and difficult internal negotiations.
Adriaan thinks we *should* pursue it.

Heather observed that the current model is $50K one-size-fits-all;
should we introduce gradations by company size?  Jon pointed out that
there is also a $15K tier; Oracle is currently sponsoring at that
level, but that tier doesn't include any voting rights.  Jon asked if
companies at the lower level could perhaps receive partial voting
rights somehow.  There was some inconclusive discussion on this.  Jon
suggested that someone put a proposal on this together in advance of
the next meeting.  Heather pointed out that some other organizations
vote on allowing new members, and we might consider that.

### Elections

All of the current officers stood for re-election.  No one else stood.
There was no discussion and all were re-elected by acclamation.

### Community feedback

Lars left early but said he didn't have any community feedback to
relay.

Bill said people are concerned about Scala 2.13 and Scala 3 migration.
Is there a Scalafix ruleset for the 2.13 collections Scalafix?  Yes,
there already is, and it will be improved further before the final
2.13 release.  We'll cover Scala 3 under "other business".

### Other business

Since there were no new proposals this quarter, the board used the
meeting time to discuss a number of issues of general concern to the
Scala community.

#### Enforcing uniform style

Bill raised a community question: how do you keep people in a project
using the same style?  This concerns companies who are considering
adopting Scala, as well as those who are already using it.

Some points that were raised in the ensuing discussion included:

* Heather: some big companies have style guides such as the scala-lang.org
  style guide, the Twitter one, the DataBricks one, and so on. James
  said that Morgan Stanley uses a minor variation on the scala-lang one.
* Several Scala linters and reformatters are available to help
  with this.
* Adriaan said there is a limit to solving this technically, though,
  it's a social problem.
* For linting, the compiler itself and the general movement is to
  standardize on Scalafix (and Scalafmt for formatting).  Heather
  noted that Scalafix is flexible enough to support customized rulesets.
  Ólafur is eager to continue to promote and improve Scalafix's
  capabilities as a linter and not just a rewriter.
* Frederick: it goes beyond syntactic/surface features of the language
  Uniformity is important so that new people can parachute into a
  codebase.
* Jon: there is a commercial offering from Codacy, with integration with
  GitHub. (But no one was sure what its current capability set is.)

#### Migration

Eugene raised the topic of Scala 3 migration.  The ensuing discussion
also covered Scala 2.13 and 2.14.

There are a number of new language features in the pipeline (union
types, intersection types, implicit functions, and so on).  New
features can be appealing, but migration always has costs.  Eugene's
question: in a corporate environment, how can users "sell" the upgrade
to management?

Martin: TASTY means the end of binary compatibility problems, not just
*after* Scala 3 migration, but during Scala 2 to 3 migration.  Like
Java where there's one bytecode and that's all that matters, in Scala
TASTY will be supported by both Scala 2.14 and Scala 3, so you will be
able to use 2.14 artifacts on Scala 3.  "This should take a lot of the
potential pain" out of the migration.

Eugene: what if something has disappeared from the standard library?
(including going back to 2.11?)

The question of the wholesale replacement of the collections API in
2.13 came up again.  Martin said this was a special one-time, thing.

James, after praising Scala's overall attention to making these
version upgrades smooth, explained Morgan Stanley's approach to
migration.  They cross-compile to both the old and new Scala versions
only during a relatively brief migration period, then "pull the plug"
on the old version, rather than continuing to cross-compile for an
extended period.  He also mentioned they have developed a macro
internally that allows compile-time `ifelse` during the migration
period.

Seth noted that the scala-collection-compat library (which already
exists, and will be improved further before the final 2.13 release)
supports cross-building collections-using code between 2.11, 2.12, and
2.13.

Seth also noted the importance of the plan for Scala 2.14 and Scala 3
to share the same standard library.  That sharing will greatly limit
how painful that migration can possibly end up being.

There was some discussion of Scalafix.  Should it actually be made
part of your build, when cross-building?  James thought the mechanics
of that  could be prohibitive.  Jon wasn't sure if he agreed.  But
none of us have concrete experience with this yet.

Bill said he knew of at least one company that's still on 2.10 just
because upgrading everything all at once is too hard.  He thinks that
this compile-time if-else thing that James mentioned could help.

Returning to the subject of Scala 3, Martin said that Guillaume
Martres has already done a proof-of-concept of
TASTY-generation-for-Scala-2.  Adriaan affirmed that TASTY support
will be a centerpiece of Scala 2.14, and that the Lightbend team
expects to continue Guillaume's work and incorporate it into an early
2.14 milestone.

Adriaan also noted that in general, 2.14 theme is alignment with
Dotty, so also standardizing on the Dotty backend is a priority,
so he hopes that the 2.14 and 3 compilers can share the same backend.
If this can be achieved, it will also limit the scope of possible
migration pain.

James noted that Morgan Stanley's migration issues tend to be not with
Scala itself, but with libraries, that is, waiting for them to become
available for the new Scala version.  TASTY should solve this, since
once libraries are published for 2.14, they will be usable on Scala 3
as well.

Eugene returned to the question of how to "sell" the Scala 3 upgrade.
Scala's problem isn't lack of features, he said, it's lack of tools.

Martin noted that TASTY should also be a basis for improving the
tooling situation; there is some material on this in his Scala Days
Berlin slides.  He also said the new compiler is "geared towards
IDEs".  So Scala 3 promises, for example, a "much much better VSCode
experience", in fact "we have that already [in Dotty], we could never
have done that with the Scala 2 presentation compiler."

James raised the issue of compiler speed.  If the Scala 3 compiler
were slower than Scala 2 compiler, that would be a problem. With the
improvements that Jason Zaugg and others have made and are still
making to the speed of the Scala 2 compiler, Scala 2 "might pull ahead
temporarily", Martin said, but he expects they will be able to make
comparable improvements to the Scala 3 compiler once the work on Scala
3 is farther along and the team is free to focus more on performance
again.

Eugene asked how soon Scala 3 would be ready for initial testing on
Twitter's codebase.  The requirements are that basics works and that
the feature set has been frozen, so they aren't testing a still-moving
target, features-wise.  Martin responded that by Scala Days 2019
a feature freeze should be in effect, with a final release targeted
for early 2020.

Returning to Scala 2.13, Eugene asked for more time to try Scala
2.13.0-M4 before the 2.13 feature freeze. What if there are unfixable
problems that can't be fixed because of the feature freeze?  Seth and
Adriaan were able to reassure Eugene on the nature of the 2.13 freeze.
It just means whole new data structures and new operations aren't being
added anymore.  Bugs are still being fixed, minor adjustments are
still being made, and the migration experience and the cross-building
experience are still being improved.

Eugene asked what the recommendation is for cross-compiling to 2.13?
Adriaan and Seth answered that there will be a migration guide on
this, there is material already on collections migration, but there
will be more.  Better documentation is a major goal for 2.13.0-RC1 and
2.13.0, including more coverage on how to do cross-compilation.

#### Tooling

Someone asked about Metals. In a Scala Center context, it falls under
Scalameta work. Heather said that Ólafur hopes to work in this in
future months.

Eugene asked how Metals compares with the Dotty LSP implementation.

Martin said the plan is to auto-detect if something is a Scala 2 or 3
project, and then use Metals or Dotty LSP behind the scenes.  There
will be a single plugin in the marketplace that does both.

Jon asked about the LSP and STP working groups, how are they doing?
Note that the working groups are making sure people are on the same
page about compatibility and not duplicating effort, they aren't
tasked with actual project work.

#### Web sites

Seth asked about web site maintenance, scala-lang.org and associated
sites.  Could more of that be happening at the Scala Center, under the
already submitted Scala Center proposal?  Not sure what's practical
here.

Adriaan suggested we work harder to encourage and allow more community
people to become committers and take more responsibility in the
website repos.  Heather and Seth seconded this.

#### Metaprogramming

The issue of "culture wars" and "clashes of styles" in the Scala
community came up again.  Martin expressed a hope that Scala 3 will
"overcome the tension" by doing something that's better than either
side of some current conflicts.  One of his goals for Scala 3's
features is to bring different styles together to reduce division in
the community.  An example of this is the improvements to typelevel
programming that Miles Sabin is participating in.

Martin showed current work on implementing `HList` using the new
`transparent` keyword.  You don't know how many type parameters you
have, but it doesn't matter, you don't write any, `transparent` makes
it happen.  Example is an HList of length 5, `xs(6)` fails at compile
time.  It's inlining-based, but inlining of (processed, not textual)
source code.  Design is new, implementation is fragile, but both are
promising.  There are three different implementation schemes being
debated.

Jon: could you have transparent methods on `StringContext`? Martin:
yes.

Eugene and Martin discussed the similarities and differences between
whitebox macros and `transparent`.  Martin is reluctant to allow
running user-level code in typer, as in whitebox macros, so he wants
to offer a "tamed" form where only certain
transformations/simplifications are allowed.
(But, see also https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty/pull/5382.)

Heather: this stuff keeps changing, how do I keep up?  Martin:
for now, you have to look at the pull requests.  Heather: is it too
soon to suggest this become a proto-SIP?  A single document that lays
out the design.  Martin: it's coming. We'll get there.  This is where
we foresee the biggest changes (in Scala 3), so yes, we'll putting
this out for feedback.  "We need to push this out quickly so people
can try this out with their macro libraries."

## Conclusion

The next meeting will be virtual and will be held in approximately
three months.
