---
layout: contact
---

# Minutes of the 13th meeting of the Scala Center, Q2 2019

Minutes are [archived](https://scala.epfl.ch/records.html) on the
Scala Center website.

## Summary

The following agenda was distributed to attendees:
[agenda](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/agendas/013-2019-q2.md).

[VirtusLab](https://virtuslab.com) has joined the Scala Center as an
affiliate "contributor" member.  Their recent open source
contributions have been focused on Metals and Bloop.

Jon Pretty announced that he would not stand for re-election as
chairperson.  For this meeting, Seth Tisue served as acting
chairperson.  Stu Hood from Twitter agreed to serve as chairperson for
a single year, under the assumption that we will now rotate the
position annually.

Martin Odersky was re-elected as technical advisor.  Seth Tisue was
re-elected as secretary.

Olafur has left the Center; a new hire, James Thompson, begins soon.
There is still one open engineering position.

Scala Center activities for the past quarter focused on MOOCs,
Scala 2.13 collections, Scala.js, Metals, Bloop, Coursier,
Almond, Scala Days, SIP meetings, and a Scala open source spree.

Full details on these activities are in
[Sébastien's report](./2019-06-19-june-19-2019.pdf).

No new proposals were made this quarter, but there was discussion
about possible future proposals around diversity, outline compilation,
the library ecosystem, and Scala 3 migration.

## Date, Time and Location

The meeting took place at the SwissTech Convention Center in Lausanne
on Tuesday, June 19, 2019 at 2:00pm (UTC), shortly before the start
of Scala Days 2019 in the same building.

Most attendees were present in person, but several participated
virtually via conference call.

Minutes were taken by Seth Tisue (secretary) with the aid of Rob
Norris.

## Attendees

Officers:

* Sébastien Doeraene (director), EPFL
* Martin Odersky (technical advisor), EPFL
* Seth Tisue (secretary and acting chairperson), Lightbend

Board members present physically:

* Stu Hood, Twitter
* Rob Norris, community/Typelevel
* Oli Makhasoeva, 47 Degrees
* Adriaan Moors, Lightbend
* Bill Venners, community/Artima

Lukas Rytz was also present on behalf of Lightbend, since Adriaan had
to leave the meeting early.

Board members present virtually:

* James Belsey, Morgan Stanley
* Jonathan Perry, Goldman Sachs
* Julien Tournay, Spotify

Apologies:

* Thomas Gawlitza, SAP
* Frederick Reiss, IBM

## Proceedings

In Jon Pretty's absence, Seth Tisue conducted the meeting
as acting chairperson.

### Activities

As the Center's Executive Director, Sébastien Doeraene summarized
Scala Center activities since the last meeting.

Most of Seb's remarks were based on his [detailed
report](./2019-06-19-june-19-2019.pdf)
on the Center's recent activities.  The following notes are a
supplement to Sébastien's report.

In reference to scala-js-bundler now supporting Scala.js 1.x, Seb mentioned
that this had been a blocker for many users who wanted to try Scala.js 1.x;
now they can.

He credited VirtusLab with some of the recent improvements to Metals.
(As mentioned above, VirtusLab has now joined the Center as an
affiliate "contributor" member.)

In reference to Coursier, Seth mentioned that sbt 1.3 has reached the
release-candidate stage and uses Coursier as its default dependency
retriever (instead of Ivy).  Martin said he had heard sbt 1.3 is faster
than previous versions, and asked if that's due to Coursier.
(Seth said yes, but only in part, there were other performance-related
changes as well.  Also, 1.3 has a "turbo mode", but it isn't enabled
by default yet, since it needs more testing.)

Stu mentioned that Twitter is now evaluating Metals for possible
adoption internally.  They're also looking into whether Pants should
support BSP (in order to interoperate with Metals and IntelliJ).

Seth mentioned that he'll be discussing with Jorge soon whether Bloop
could be useful as a new partial basis for the Scala community build,
by providing support for multiple build tools, for example Mill and
Maven.  (The community build is currently sbt-only.)

Julien asked if there was news about Spotify's accepted proposal
[SCP-020](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/020-sbt-transitive-dependencies-conflicts.md),
about improving support for resolving
dependency conflicts in sbt.  "Not really," said Seb, but he promised
to push on it soon and have news next time.

### Financial report

The Center's financial situation is the same as last quarter, said
Seb.  There are no new earning figures for the MOOCs to report yet.
Seb will report on that at the next meeting, but he said that he
believes the figures will be "the same as usual".

As for staffing:

Olafur is leaving at the end of June.  In addition to getting Metals
0.5 out, he has been focusing on transferring his knowledge to
VirtusLab.  (He [later
tweeted](https://twitter.com/olafurpg/status/1144636827372048384) that
he has accepted a position at Twitter and will continue working on
Scala tooling.)

The Center has nearly finalized hiring a new engineer named James
Thompson.  James is expected to begin work in August.  But, that will
still leave the Center one engineer short.

Stu asked what James will work on.  Seb said they think the work on
TASTy will be a good fit, given James interest and background in
compilers.

### Election of officers

Three positions are up for election: chairperson, secretary, and
technical advisor.

For technical advisor, Martin agreed to serve again, and Seth agreed
to serve again as secretary.  There were no other nominations, so both
were re-elected.

For chairperson, there were no candidates or nominations in the few
weeks since Jon stepped down.  In the absence of an obvious
replacement for Jon, there was some discussion about what the position
involves.  Seb asked if they should put out a call to the community,
or someone in the room was interested.

"Can it be anybody?", asked Bill.  "In theory", said Seb; it could
even be someone who is also filling another role.

Seb suggested looking within the board, but under the assumption that
the position would rotate every year.  Jon did it for three years, but
if we rotated it annually, then no one volunter would be burdened too
much.

The chair's main responsibilities are organizing and leading the
meetings and handling incoming proposals.

Martin asked if Darja would be an appropriate choice.  Seb said they
collectively agreed that it would be preferable and more appropriate
to have someone from outside, not someone from within the Center
itself.  (But Martin pointed out that Darja could help more with
logistics, to make the chair's job easier.  And Seth added that
he, as secretary, can also help with recordkeeping and logitics.)

Seth asked if the chair was expected to be involved in fundraising,
including recruiting new board members.  Seb said that Jon's
activities on that were of course appreciated, but it's not
necessarily part of the job.

After some further discussion, Stu agreed to stand for the position,
to begin the annual rotation.  There were no objections or other
nominations.

### Community feedback

Since the last meeting, Bill and Rob spent some time investigating and
discussing community issues, prompted in part by the recent removal of
some projects from the Scala community build on code-of-conduct
grounds.

Shortly, in advance of the meeting, they provided the board with the
following statement, as a basis for discussion:

> Scala’s un-opinionated design and fusion of OO and functional
> programming has attracted people with diverse backgrounds and
> perspectives. But that doesn’t mean the online discussions cannot be
> welcoming and friendly to newcomers. We would like the Scala
> community to have the reputation of being nice, and we think that
> moderation is an important tool that people have been too hesitant
> to use in the past.
>
> * Online interaction is different than in person because bandwidth is lower.
> * Online communities need moderation.
> * Moderation is an important part of the Scala code of conduct.
> * We think the Scala community should have more active moderation of online forums.
> * Moderators should have wide discretion to make moderation decisions.
> * Moderation is hard, and moderators need support.
> * One reason moderation is hard is that people who are misbehaving online may have made valuable contributions to the Scala community. Nevertheless, such contributions are not a license to misbehave online.
> * We would like to see moderation become an accepted part of the Scala culture.
> * The Scala Center should develop a plan to identify, train, and support moderators for the online forums that the Scala Center manages, with the intent to support the community at large.

Martin asked what forums the Center manages.  Seb said that the Center
created and continues to host both Discourse instances
(https://users.scala-lang.org and
https://contributors.scala-lang.org).

The management situation on Gitter (http://gitter.im/scala/scala and
other rooms under the Scala organization) is less clear.  The rooms
predate the creation of the Center, and it's Lightbend who has been
most active in moderating them. Anyone with the "admin bit" on GitHub
has moderator powers on Gitter and on GitHub itself of course. That
includes more than a few people at both the Center and at Lightbend,
but most of those individuals don't usually choose to involve
themselves with moderation.

Although day-to-day chat-room moderation has usually been done by
Lightbend, Darja and Seb are available as points of contact if
disputes arise.  Community members may contact them individually, or
via the new `Scala-CoC@epfl.ch` email address.  That address was
recently added to the [Scala Code of Conduct
page](https://www.scala-lang.org/conduct/). For people who prefer to
contact particular individuals, the code also now offers Darja and Seb
as individual points of contact, along with Adriaan and Seth.

Bill mentioned that it's important to provide individual points of
contact at conferences as well.  Seth suggested that conference
organizers should contact Darja for advice on this.

Seb added that since the last time the board discussed moderation, a
few meetings ago, the Center created a shared document for moderators
to record incidents and actions taken, so that we have documentation.

Stu suggested doing postmorterms after incidents.  Lukas thinks we're
already doing better at this since last year, now that we have the
moderation log and are discussing moderation more internally.

Stu also asked about training for moderators.  Seb said that training
is something "we haven't done" except for Darja, who does have
training in this area.  We look to her to "steer us", said Seb.  Also,
so far the people who have done the most moderation are people who are
longtime members of the Scala organization.  He said it has sometimes
been suggested that we open up moderation to outside people, and he's
still considering whether that should happen.  Lukas said that in
the recent public discussions about moderation incidents, community
members have repeatedly "stepped up" with valuable input.

James asked if there were other organizations or programming languages
we should look to as models, or for advice.  Rob said the Rust
community would be worth looking at, and Bill expressed interest in
finding out how Python manages this.  Seb said he and Darja had hoped
to have a panel on this subject at Scala Days, with representatives
from other languages, but they weren't able to secure suitable
participants in time.

Seth observed that chat-room and forum moderation has been "quiet"
this year, which is promising.  But a notable exception was the
discussion about the community build, which became very heated. There
were some messages in it thread that were clearly themselves in
violation of CoC.  Rob observed that it's especially difficult to
moderate such meta-threads; he suggested temporarily locking a thread
as a measure to calm down things down.  But Seb worries that locking
can itself provoke a negative reaction, and Martin observed that you
need to let people "let off steam" somehow.  It's a difficult balance
to strike.  Martin expressed contentment, more or less, with the
course of the community build discussion ("I feared much worse").

### Proposals

No proposals were received this quarter.

### Other business

Seth asked if anyone wanted to discuss ideas for proposals or discuss
status of past proposals.

Oli said that she and her colleagues are working on a proposal about
diversity that they hope to present at the next meeting, about "things
the Scala Center could do to make our community more diverse."

Rob is considering ways the Center could "continue development on
projects that have fallen off the radar", or perhaps do something new
to address similar goals.  He mentioned Scaladex, the Scala Platform
Process, and Scalafix.

Martin suggested that the Center could work on using Scalafix to ease
migration to Scala 3.  Lukas mentioned that Dale Wijnand at Lightbend
has done some work in this area in a new repo
https://github.com/scala/scala-rewrites, but it's not an official
effort.  Lukas also said that Scalafix is missing a central repository
of rules.  Martin mentioned that some desirable rewrites involving
implicit resolution can't currently be implemented unless Scalafix
itself is improved.

Stu mentioned BSP and said that he hopes the Center will continue
developing it.  Perhaps it could "break out" of the Scala community
and gain traction in other languages.  And, "We would love for more
build tools to support it."

Seth asked Stu about Twitter's rsc project.  Stu said it is now "very
much an outliner" and not a full compiler.  They're pursuing building
an outliner with serializable output.  They're still not ready to make
a proposal to the Center about it, but they might next time.  (James
is interested in this as well, and suggested involving Adriaan.)

## Conclusion

As usual, the next meeting will be in approximately three months,
likely in September, almost certainly held virtually.
