---
layout: contact
---

# Minutes of the 15th meeting of the Scala Center, Q4 2019

Minutes are [archived](https://scala.epfl.ch/records.html) on the
Scala Center website.

## Summary

The following agenda was distributed to attendees:
[agenda](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/agendas/015-2019-q4.md).

Darja Jovanovic is the Center's new executive director.  Sébastien
Doeraene is now technical director.

VirtusLab is now a full voting member of the board, represented by
Krzysztof Romanowski.  IBM has left the board.

Staffing changes in engineering: Jorge Vicente Cantero left the Center
in November.  Offers have been made to three new engineers.

Scala Center activities for the past quarter focused on MOOCs, Scala 3
interoperability with Scala 2, SemanticDB support for Scala 3 (to
support Metals), Metals and Bloop, Scala.js, SIP (Scala Improvement
Process) meetings, the contributors summit at ScalaSphere, Scala Days
2020, recruiting and hiring, and community moderation.

Full details on these activities are in
[Sébastien's report](./2019-12-16-december-16-2019.pdf).

Darja presented her plans for the future of the Center, including
growth in funding, board membership, and staffing, as well as
work on Scala 3.

Two proposals were discussed:

* [SCP-021](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/021-zinc-improvements.md): Zinc improvements (Lightbend)
* [SCP-022](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/022-jsr-45.md): Completing SCP-011: implement JSR-45 for improved Scala debugging experience

Both proposals were voted on and accepted.

Other topics discussed included the future of Scala Native, the Scala
2 roadmap, and the future of Bloop.

## Date, Time and Location

The meeting took place virtually on Monday, December 16, 2019 at
4:00pm (UTC).

Minutes were taken by Seth Tisue (secretary).

## Attendees

Officers:

* Stu Hood (chairperson), Twitter
* Darja Jovanovic (executive director), EPFL
* Sébastien Doeraene (technical director), EPFL
* Martin Odersky (technical advisor), EPFL
* Seth Tisue (secretary), Lightbend

Board members present:

* Erik Bakker, Lunatech
* James Belsey, Morgan Stanley
* Adriaan Moors, Lightbend
* Rob Norris, community/Typelevel
* Krzysztof Romanowski, VirtusLab
* Bill Venners, community/Artima

Guests:

* Ólafur Geirsson, Twitter
* Eugene Yokota, Lightbend

Apologies:

* Thomas Gawlitza, SAP
* Oli Makhasoeva, 47 Degrees
* Jonathan Perry, Goldman Sachs
* Julien Tournay, Spotify

## Proceedings

Stu introduced the meeting.  He is serving as chairperson of the
advisory board for a year, as part of the new plan to rotate the
position annually.

Krzysztof Romanowski, head of developer tooling at VirtusLab,
introduced himself.  VirtusLab has been a contributing member of the
Center since April; "contributing member" meaning they provide
engineering rather than financial support.  Previously, this only gave
VirtusLab "affiliate" status, but the Center was recently able to
amend its bylaws so that contributing members can be full voting
members of the board.  Hence, this was Krzysztof's first time
attending the meeting.  For the Center, VirtusLab engineers have
mainly been working on Metals.

Darja Jovanovic, who has been the Center's communication manager for
the past two years, announced that she has assumed the role of
executive director.  Former executive director Sébastien Doeraene has
moved into the newly created role of "technical director".  She
described the two roles as akin to CEO and CTO of a company.  (Martin
Odersky remains as technical advisor.)  In an email to the board, Seb
described the change as follows: "I will be more available to
contribute as an engineer and as a tech lead, while Darja will take on
the organisational, team management, and representation tasks."

### Activities

As the Center's technical director, Sébastien Doeraene summarized
Scala Center activities since the last meeting.

Most of Seb's remarks were based on his [detailed report](./2019-12-16-december-16-2019.pdf)
on the Center's recent activities.  The following notes are a
supplement to Sébastien's report.

Offers have been made to three new engineers.  The current plan is
that:

* one engineer will work mostly on compiler-related tasks including Scala Native
* one engineer will work on Scalafix, Scala 3, and other tooling and Scala 3 issues,
  including Metals and Bloop (now that Olaf and Jorge have left)
* one engineer will work on web tools including Scaladex ("which we
  very much intend to bring back to life, to a good life") and on
  educational materials, documentation, and the Scala beginner's
  experience

Seb: "I hope that next time I can share the new engineers' names."

### Director's statement

Darja presented the board with her thoughts about the future of the Center
under her directorship.

Darja sees her skills as: "Project and team management; Facilitation,
negotiation, and conflict management; Organization and basically
getting things done."

"We started three years ago, we are into a fourth year.
Congratulations everyone for surviving and going through the most
difficult period for any new organization.  Thank you everyone
for your trust, your vote of confidence, for sticking with us.
As of now, we can start a new era. We can do more."

"We all know that Scala 3 is coming, day by day it is becoming a
reality," and the Scala Center is essential for making it happen, so
"we need more support."

Darja identified "deliverables" that she wants to achieve as director:

* Grow the Scala Center team to 15 people, including interns and
  students, "hopefully by September 2021."
* Meet individually with all board members, to "strengthen the
  relationship between the Center and its board members, in order to
  coordinate our efforts in spreading Scala."
* Lift the USD 50K donation limit for board members and add five
  new companies to the board by mid-2021.
* Create a "solid project list" to be able to distribute work
  beyond Scala Center
* Grow the community and deepening relationships through conferences,
  meetups, trainings, education events, and moderation training.

Some of the companies that Darja has in mind as potential new board
members are large enough that more than 50K of support is reasonable
goal, hence the desire to lift that limit.  With more funding, in
addition to hiring full-time engineers it is also possible to engage
contractors (for example, Alexandre Archambault).

Discussion topic for the board: how should we determine which
companies are expected to pay more than 50K, and how much more?  "We
need your advice."  Can we create objective requirements?  Note that
in order to change this, _every_ existing board member would need to
approve any changes to the contract terms.

Stu and Rob asked if companies that paid more would also somehow
receive more.  Is there any danger that the board would be dominated
by a few large donors?  "No", said Darja, in short, though the Center
is open to suggestions on whether there are additional benefits that
would make sense to provide.  Seb: "The best we can probably provide
as an additional benefit is to be listed in a different category on
the website", e.g. "platinum". Certainly additional funds means more
engineers can be hired, so companies will now that the dollars will be
"impactful", but there wouldn't be any "direct control" over how the
money is spent.  Martin: "The purpose of the proposal is to have an
agreement that lets companies pay more, but under the same set of
regulations" we already have -- at least, in this round of changes.

There was discussion about whether it might also, as a separate and
additional change, be possible for companies to directly fund certain
tasks.  Stu said this seemed like "a departure", and that an
alternative would be for a company to fund a contractor not formally
associated with the Center to do the work.  But there is a clear
benefit to having the Center involved, or even to ultimately "own" a
change, because of the Center's expertise and connections.  The
question was left open, but Darja promised to follow up.

### Financial report

This was presented by Seb.

IBM has exited, leaving eight members.

At the moment, the Center has only one single full-time engineer,
Jamie.  (Of course, that doesn't include the engineering work done by
e.g. Seb and Julien.)  But soon, there will be four full-timers
again.

There is no news this time around about funds from MOOCs. That news
comes only twice a year.

### Community feedback

Bill: "I don't have anything this quarter. People are happy."

Rob asked -- on behalf of Eric Richardson and others in the community
-- about the status of Scala Native, now that Denys Shabalin has left
EPFL.  What are the Center's plans there?

Seb: "One of the new people we are hiring has a strong compilers
background and Scala Native will be his main project.  So we do have
plans to support Scala Native.  At the very least, to bring it up to
date with Scala 2.13. At the moment it is stuck on Scala 2.11, so we
are two major versions behind."

Seb said that he personally plans to work on Scala Native as well,
since he now has fewer administrative responsibilities, and because
"Scala.js is basically done -- there is very little to keep doing."

### Proposals

Both proposals were presented and discussed before either proposal was voted on.

#### SCP-021: Zinc improvements

Proposed by Adriaan Moors on behalf of Lightbend.  Eugene Yokota, also
of Lightbend, was the main author of the proposal and joined the meeting
as a guest to present the proposal to the board.

"We propose enhancements to the core of the compilation toolchain,
Zinc. Zinc provides Scala compilation services, including incremental
compilation, to build tools and IDEs."  See the [proposal
text](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/021-zinc-improvements.md)
for details.

See also the [September 2019
minutes](https://scala.epfl.ch/minutes/2019/09/11/september-11-2019.html),
when a draft of the proposal received a round of initial discussion.

Eugene: "Zinc's incremental compilation is how, directly or
indirectly, the Scala language is experienced, whether it's through
Metals, or build servers, or the many build tools", not only sbt
(where Zinc originated).  But Zinc has "lagged", compared to the
evolution of the Scala language and compiler.  Language changes that
come out of the SIP process have implications for Zinc's ability to do
correct incremental compilation, but Zinc hasn't always kept up.  "At
Lightbend, we're refocusing energy into improving incremental
compilation."

The proposal is "two-pronged": to improve Zinc's performance and
correctness for Scala 2, but also to ensure that those gains are
preserved as we move to Scala 3.  Eugene said his "ask" is for
the Center to participate in the design process so that Zinc can
continue to satisfy all of these goals, and to participate in the
implementation work, too.

In the past, incremental compilation has been off to the side and
always taken into account.  "When people send a proposal to change the
language, how it will affect incremental compilation should be
considered."  Incremental compilation should be a "first class
citizen".

As for correctness, when Zinc has failed to keep pace with language
changes, it often results in "under-compilation", which means
recompiling too few files when something has changed.  These bugs need
to be identified and addressed; some are low-hanging fruit, others may
be harder.

Zinc and the compiler bridge also need improvements in the area of
interoperability between Scala 2 and Scala 3, in both directions.

There's also an "emerging trend" towards "larger-scale compilation":
at Twitter, at Morgan Stanley, and elsewhere.  Zinc may need changes
to serve as a basis for those efforts.  But even if those efforts take
a different direction instead, Stu said Twitter will still use and
value Zinc "for many years".

Rob voiced support for Zinc getting continued attention: "ensuring
continuity with tooling" is "super important".

Seth asked what the Scala Center's role in this work would be, versus
Lightbend's role.  Eugene: "It depends", that will partly come out of
discussions; but at least for the time being, we can expect Lightbend
to remain more focused on Scala 2 and the Center more on Scala 3.
So the Center will be "bridging the 2 effort into the 3 world".

Stu asked Seb for his input.  Seb said that the current version of the
proposal has now addressed some of the concerns he had with the first
version.  "Overall I think the proposal is a good thing. If accepted,
we would probably task Jamie with it, since he's already working in the
boundary between 2 and 3. In the design, I would involve myself as
well. I think we have the right people to do this."

**Voting**: The proposal is accepted by unanimous vote (by the six
present voting members).

#### SCP-022: Completing SCP-011: implement JSR-45 for improved Scala debugging experience

Proposed by Stu Hood on behalf of Twitter.  Ólafur Geirsson, formerly
a Scala Center engineer for three years, now at Twitter, wrote the
proposal and attended the meeting to present it.

"This is a proposal to prioritize the completion of SCP-011. To reduce
the scope of SCP-011, this proposal suggests to focus only contributing
JSR-45 support to the Scala 2 compiler."  See the [proposal
text](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/022-jsr-45.md),
and the [text of
SCP-011](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/011-debugging-symbols.md),
for details.

Olaf: "No one really ended up working on this project" after it was
initially proposed, but "I believe that right now is a good time to
focus on it again", because "we're now adding debugging support to
Metals" and because "the Scala 3 inliner is getting a lot more
powerful", and that increases the need for JSR-45 support so you
can set breakpoints inside of inline functions.

He said that the debugging support that has been added to Metals
so far is "pretty rough" and there will be a "long tail" of work
needed to bring it to a comparable level of polish as, for example,
the IntelliJ debugger.

He also raised the subject of code coverage.  The Scala 2 solution is
scoverage, but that's a "fairly heavy" compiler plugin that adds
"significant compile-time overhead and runtime overhead" and won't
work on Scala 3.  Olaf thinks a new solution could be bytecode-based
instead and consume the same information that a debugger uses.

James expressed interest in the code coverage angle, but said that
Morgan Stanley hasn't found bytecode-based code coverage to be a
satisfactory approach.  Olaf allowed that "there is no guaranteed
success" in the approach he's suggesting, but he thinks it's worth
seeing if the bytecode-based approach can be done better and be more
successful than before.  (There was some further discussion of the
technical basis for Jacoco, code coverage in IntelliJ, Kotlin's
coverage tools, and so on.)

Stu wondered if too much focus on coverage rather than debugging
might be "a stretch" for this proposal's scope.

Stu asked Seb for his input.  Seb said he didn't know enough about
code coverage to comment on that aspect, but he is "definitely
convinced" by the debugging support angle, especially when you
consider Scala 3's inliner.  But "I'm a bit concerned" by the effort
level (six engineer months). "The implementation of JSR-45 itself
should be much less than that", shouldn't it?  So we need to decide
whether the proposal should involve pursuing coverage, or not.  It
sounds fine to Olaf to do a month or two of work to "kickstart" it,
and then revisit whether further effort should be added. That initial
effort "may encourage other people" to help pursue it further.

**Voting**: The proposal is accepted by unanimous vote (by the six
present voting members).

### Other business

#### Scala 2 roadmap

Adriaan broke the news to the board that the Lightbend team has
decided that Scala 2.14 isn't happening.  This same news was announced
to the public a few days later in [this blog
post](https://www.scala-lang.org/2019/12/18/road-to-scala-3.html).

Adriaan: "We're not saying it's _certain_ that we'll _never_ do a
2.14," but if it eventually happens, the main reason to do it would be
to make additions and changes to the standard library.

Stu's reaction: "I'm actually happy not to have a 2.14.  At Twitter we
were considering two completely blocking Scala upgrades before we
could move to Scala 3 (2.13 first, then 2.14), so I'm excited we don't
have do that."

And James: "This seems like the best approach. Only doing 2.13, and
waiting to see how things are in 3, before iterating on building
things we need to bridge the gap.  I think it's a good move."

Adriaan: re: backporting Scala 3 features to 2, "We thought the
cost/benefit wasn't good because it wouldn't smooth migration that
much."  Stu asked: "Can we keep options open w/r/t to 3-to-2 backports
to improving compatibility?"

Adriaan's primary anwer was "We'd rather invest in Scalafix and
Scalafmt", so you could have one canonical source tree which is the 3
one, and you automatically rewrite back to 2. But on the other hand,
yes, it remains possible to "backport syntax stuff and offer it under
a flag" in 2.13.x, doing that in some cases isn't entirely ruled out
in advance.

Rob asked about the other direction: forward-porting tools, from 2 to 3.
Seth, referring to the Lightbend team: "Yes, this roadmap change
will free up some of our time for that kind of thing."  And Seb also
said "yes, the Scala Center is committed to doing this, using Scalafix,
and note that the Dotty compiler also does some of this itself already."

Martin: forward-migration tools may not be as pressing a concern as
you might imagine, since in general Scala 3 supports most Scala 2
syntax and semantics, including Scala 2 style implicits.  Regardless,
offering forward-rewriting is still valuable for users who don't want
or need to cross-compile between 2 and 3, or who are eager to start
writing fully 3-style code sooner rather than later.

Martin: "I want to add one thing which I think would be really
helpful. The idea is from you, Adriaan: to offer a rewrite that adds
explicit type information to a Scala 2 program, to make it much more
likely that it will compile the same on Scala 3.  Then some of those
types could be dropped afterwards, perhaps by binary search." Olaf:
"We have this at Twitter, using Scalafix.  It doesn't remove the types
afterwards, but it does the adding. It was not trivial but it is
working pretty well."

Stu: It took them a long time, but Python 3 migration has some
positive lessons for us. They had "phased" migration tools. First,
rewrites that let you stay in 2 but get your code ready. You commit
that, then you do a second phase where you make the jump.

#### Bloop

Adriaan: let's discuss Bloop's future. Bloop forked zinc; can those
changes be brought back in?  And what's the future for Metals on Scala
3?

Seb: for Metals, most of our involvement is through VirtusLab, which
is going great, we have no concerns.  For Bloop, in the immediate
future, Jorge has offered to keep maintaining it, so far, but if that
doesn't work out for some reason, we would definitely reassign someone
to keep evolving and maintaining Bloop, at least as long as it's a
core component of how Metals works.

Seb, re: reconciling the Zinc forks, "We should do that at some
point", yes, and it could fall under SCP-021.  Adriaan: "As we invest
in Zinc, we want to only do it once."

### Conclusion

As usual, the next meeting will be in approximately three months,
likely in late March, almost certainly held virtually.
