---
layout: contact
---

# Minutes of the 15th meeting of the Scala Center, Q4 2019

Minutes are [archived](https://scala.epfl.ch/records.html) on the
Scala Center website.

## Summary

The following agenda was distributed to attendees:
[agenda](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/agendas/015-2019-q4.md).

Darja Jovanovic is the Center's new executive director.  Sébastien
Doeraene is now technical director.

VirtusLab is now a full voting member of the board, represented by
Krzysztof Romanowski.  IBM has left the board.

Staffing changes in engineering: Jorge Vicente Cantero left the Center
in November.  Offers have been made to three new engineers.

Scala Center activities for the past quarter focused on MOOCs, Scala 3
interoperability with Scala 2, SemanticDB support for Scala 3 (to
support Metals), Metals and Bloop, Scala.js, SIP (Scala Improvement
Process) meetings, the contributors summit at ScalaSphere, Scala Days
2020, recruiting and hiring, and community moderation.

Full details on these activities are in
[Sébastien's report](./2019-12-16-december-16-2019.pdf).

Darja presented her plans for the future of the Center, including
growth in funding, board membership, and staffing, as well as
work on Scala 3.

Two proposals were discussed:

* [SCP-021](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/021-zinc-improvements.md): Zinc improvements (Lightbend)
* [SCP-022](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/022-jsr-45.md): Completing SCP-011: implement JSR-45 for improved Scala debugging experience

Both proposals were voted on and accepted.

Other topics discussed included the future of Scala Native, the Scala
2 roadmap, and the future of Bloop.

## Date, Time and Location

The meeting took place virtually on Monday, December 16, 2019 at
4:00pm (UTC).

Minutes were taken by Seth Tisue (secretary).

## Attendees

Officers:

* Stu Hood (chairperson), Twitter
* Darja Jovanovic (executive director), EPFL
* Sébastien Doeraene (technical director), EPFL
* Martin Odersky (technical advisor), EPFL
* Seth Tisue (secretary), Lightbend

Board members present:

* Erik Bakker, Lunatech
* James Belsey, Morgan Stanley
* Adriaan Moors, Lightbend
* Rob Norris, community/Typelevel
* Krzysztof Romanowski, VirtusLab
* Bill Venners, community/Artima

Guests:

* Ólafur Geirsson, Twitter
* Eugene Yokota, Lightbend

Apologies:

* Thomas Gawlitza, SAP
* Oli Makhasoeva, 47 Degrees
* Jonathan Perry, Goldman Sachs
* Julien Tournay, Spotify

## Proceedings

TODO

### Activities

As the Center's technical director, Sébastien Doeraene summarized
Scala Center activities since the last meeting.

Most of Seb's remarks were based on his [detailed report](./2019-12-16-december-16-2019.pdf)
on the Center's recent activities.  The following notes are a
supplement to Sébastien's report.

TODO

### Director's statement

TODO

### Financial report

TODO

### Community feedback

TODO

### Proposals

Both proposals were presented and discussed before either proposal was voted on.

#### SCP-021: Zinc improvements

Proposed by Adriaan Moors on behalf of Lightbend.  Eugene Yokota, also
of Lightbend, was the main author of the proposal and joined the meeting
as a guest to present the proposal to the board.

"We propose enhancements to the core of the compilation toolchain,
Zinc. Zinc provides Scala compilation services, including incremental
compilation, to build tools and IDEs."  See the [proposal
text](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/021-zinc-improvements.md)
for details.

See also the [September 2019
minutes](https://scala.epfl.ch/minutes/2019/09/11/september-11-2019.html),
when a draft of the proposal received a round of initial discussion.

TODO

**Voting**: The proposal is accepted.

#### SCP-022: Completing SCP-011: implement JSR-45 for improved Scala debugging experience

Proposed by Stu Hood on behalf of Twitter.  Ólafur Geirsson, formerly
a Scala Center engineer for three years, now at Twitter, wrote the
proposal and attended the meeting to present it.

"This is a proposal to prioritize the completion of SCP-011. To reduce
the scope of SCP-011, this proposal suggests to focus only contributing
JSR-45 support to the Scala 2 compiler."  See the [proposal
text](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/022-jsr-45.md),
and the [text of
SCP-011](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/011-debugging-symbols.md),
for details.

TODO

**Voting**: The proposal is accepted.

### Other business

#### Scala 2 roadmap

TODO

#### Bloop

TODO

### Conclusion

As usual, the next meeting will be in approximately three months,
likely in late March, almost certainly held virtually.
