---
layout: contact
---

# Minutes of the 18th meeting of the Scala Center, Q3 2020

Minutes are [archived](https://scala.epfl.ch/records.html) on the
Scala Center website.

## Summary

The following agenda was distributed to attendees:
[agenda](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/agendas/018-2020-q3.md).

Scala Center activities for the past quarter focused on MOOCs, Scala
3, Scala 3 migration guide and tooling, TASTy reader, Metals, Scala
Native, Scala.js, BSP in sbt, debugger support, dependency management
in sbt, blog posts, communication via Discourse, and ongoing hiring
and team-building and training.

Staffing changes: Ergys Dona has left the Center and is doing PhD work
at LAMP. Three engineers have joined the Center full time: Wojciech
Mazur joined in July and is working on Scala Native; Vincenzo
Bazzucchi joined in September and is working mainly on education;
Fengyun Liu joined in October and is working mainly on Scala 3. A
student, Katja Goltsova, is now working part time on Scala 3.

More details on all this are in
[Darja's report](./2020-10-28-darja-october-28-2020.pdf) on the Center's overall progress,
[Seb's report](./2020-10-28-seb-october-28-2020.pdf) on technical activities, and
[Adrien's report](./2020-10-28-adrien-october-28-2020.pdf) on the Scala 3 migration guide.

One proposal was discussed:

* [SCP-025](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/025-inclusive-language.md): Diversity Initiatives (Daniela Sfregola, Morgan Stanley)

The proposal was voted on and accepted.

## Date, Time and Location

The meeting took place virtually on Wednesday, October 28, 2020 at
4:00pm (UTC).

Minutes were taken by Seth Tisue (secretary).

## Attendees

Officers:

* Adriaan Moors (chairperson)
  * also board member, representing Lightbend
* Darja Jovanovic (executive director), EPFL
* Sébastien Doeraene (technical director), EPFL
* Martin Odersky (technical advisor), EPFL
* Seth Tisue (secretary), Lightbend

Board members:

* Ólafur Páll Geirsson, Twitter
* Graham Griffiths, Goldman Sachs
* Chris Kipp, Lunatech
* Rebecca Marks, 47 Degrees
* Rob Norris, community/Typelevel
* Filipe Regadas, Spotify
* Krzysztof Romanowski, VirtusLab
* Daniela Sfregola, Morgan Stanley
* Bill Venners, community/Artima

Guests:

* Adrien Piquerez, Scala Center

Apologies: none. Full house!

## Proceedings

Adriaan Moors of Lightbend chaired the meeting for the first time.  He
began by introducing Daniela Sfregola, who is now representing Morgan
Stanley, and Rebecca Marks, who is now representing 47 Degrees.

## Activities reports

Darja, Seb, and Adrien summarized Scala Center activities since the last
meeting.

Their remarks were largely based on their reports:

* [Darja's report](./2020-10-28-darja-october-28-2020.pdf)
* [Seb's report](./2020-10-28-seb-october-28-2020.pdf)
* [Adrien's report](./2020-10-28-adrien-october-28-2020.pdf) on the Scala 3 Migration Guide

The following notes do not repeat the content of the reports,
but only supplement them.

Darja especially highlighted the growth of the team.  The Center
now has 13 people, plus Martin, plus contractors, and is working
closely with multiple outside partners as well.

Several of the projects Seb highlighted are also described in recent
blog posts on the Scala site, some of which weren't published until
after the meeting:

* [BSP Support in sbt 1.4](https://www.scala-lang.org/blog/2020/10/27/bsp-in-sbt.html) by Adrien
* [Implementing Scala.js Support for Scala 3](https://www.scala-lang.org/2020/11/03/scalajs-for-scala-3.html) by Seb
* [Explicit term inference with Scala 3](https://www.scala-lang.org/2020/11/06/explicit-term-inference-in-scala-3.html) by Meriam and Vincenzo
* [Forward Compatibility for the Scala 3 Transition](https://www.scala-lang.org/blog/2020/11/19/scala-3-forward-compat.html) by Jamie

Rob asked about BSP support in sbt: "Does it fix the issue where IntelliJ's type
checker disagrees with scalac's type checker?"  Seb: "It does, but you have to ask
IntelliJ to use the errors that come through BSP", you have to flip a switch.

Rebecca asked about the new sbt dependency management plugins; will
they be available for older versions of sbt?  Seb: "If by older
versions you mean 0.13, no." Their intent is to support 1.2 onwards;
testing might not in place for 1.2 and 1.3, but bug reports on that
would be addressed.

Chris asked about these plugins, also: "Are they tightly coupled to
sbt?  Is there logic that other build tools could use and benefit
from?"  Seb: "The plugins are mainly glue. The logic they implement
is not deep or complicated. For other build tools, you might as well
just re-implement the same logic."

Chris also asked: now that sbt supports BSP directly, "What is the
future of Bloop, what is the Center's vision for Bloop?"  Bloop wasn't
mentioned in the Center's recent updates.  Seb began by explaining the
technical tradeoffs between the two solutions, as follows: "There are
still disadvantages of using sbt's direct BSP support. Bloop makes
different tradeoffs.  Bloop is sometimes faster; Bloop shares a
compiler and JVM between projects.  But Bloop's model is simpler than
sbt's. If your build is not too complex for Bloop to handle well, it's
probably better to still use Bloop. If your build relies on source
generators, for example, or otherwise customizes its task graph, so
that Bloop's projection isn't accurate enough, then using sbt's BSP
support has a huge advantage."

What, then, is Bloop's future?  Seb: "We'll keep maintaining Bloop.
We recently assigned Tomasz Godzik from VirtusLab as the Center's
official Bloop maintainer. There are no plans to drop Bloop.  We will
keep having it and keep maintaining it."  Chris: "So will it be just
maintenance, or active development?" Darja stepped in, thanked Chris
for raising these questions, and said: "It's hard to answer, it's not
black and white.  With Bloop, it is very important to say that it was
one person's project, one person's vision," but then Jorge left, and
he has also since become less available either for day-to-day
involvement or to foster a community around it.  "So after almost a
year of trying to figure this out, the Center stepped in and became
more involved again," but "We will not lay down any kind of milestone
plan like we did for other projects this quarter," there is too much
else going on.

Filipe (from Spotify, filling in for Julien Tournay at this meeting):
"When do you expect the sbt dependency management plugins to be
released?"  Seb: "A few weeks."

After Adrien presented his report on the Scala 3 Migration Guide, Rob
asked: "When will this be publicized? It looks extremely useful
already." Adrien: "We definitely want community feedback." Darja: "I
am asking everyone in this meeting to help spread the word.  We
weren't ready before," but now is the time. There is a nuance: most
users won't actually be migrating until Scala 3.0.0-RC1 is out, but
for those are who migrating early, yes, feedback on the migration
guide is highly encouraged, and help publicizing that is welcome, as
long as everyone understands that the entire migration picture isn't
completely in place yet.

Seth said he already found the guide very useful in its current state.
Rob: "So can I tweet it, or not?" Seth: "I already tweeted it just
now," so that's a yes.

Filipe: "The guide looks great, it's beautiful," but the connection to
the Scala 3 example project could be improved.  Adrien: yes, we'll do
that.

Martin asked: "You mentioned 100 libraries have been published for
Scala 3.  How did you come up with that number?"  Adrien: "Scaladex."

Adriaan asked Darja if the Center wants beta testers for the new MOOC.
Darja said yes, "if you know anyone who is interested," have them
contact me.

## Financial report

This was presented by Darja.  Her
[report](./2020-10-28-darja-october-28-2020.pdf) includes details, but
in short: an anonymous donor is supporting work on Scala Native. Q1
and Q2 MOOC income was roughly steady; Q3 and Q4 numbers are not in
yet.  Board membership was stable this quarter.  Two new board members
will be needed to maintain the current staffing level; Darja intends
to focus on this.

## Community feedback

Bill, bobbing up and down as he walked on a treadmill, raised two topics.

First, "What is the latest estimate for when the Scala 3 release
candidate is coming, and when the final release will happen?"  Martin:
"The plan is to have a first RC out before Christmas. After that, the
usual RC process is bugfixes only, no more features."  Bill: "How long
did it usually take for Scala 2 major versions to get from a first RC
to final?" Adriaan: "We try for six weeks, but it sometimes takes
longer."  Seth concurred.

Second, a suggestion: "I think it's important, in the communication
around the release, not to only emphasize changes and features. That
can scare people a little. To make people feel comfortable, emphasize
benefits, and also emphasize the enormous work and care that has gone
into helping people migrate. All that work has been done, and it needs
to be communicated. Really emphasize: here's how we are helping you
migrate." Martin: "Good point, thank you." Darja: "Agreed."  Darja
also mentioned that 47 Degrees will be helping the Center with
marketing.

Rob: "I don't have anything specific this time, but I want to say
that I'm really happy with what I'm seeing, it's really exciting
that everything seems to be coming together really well. I see a lot
of library authors working really hard to get the ecosystem going
for Scala 3. Congratulations."

## Proposals

### SCP-025: Use of Inclusive Language

The [proposal](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/025-inclusive-language.md) was submitted by Daniela Sfregola of Morgan Stanley.

Daniela summarized the motivation for the proposal as follows: "Words
that we use do matter. As a community, we want to make sure that our
commmunity is as inclusive as possible. [But] as technologists
sometimes we use terms that carry negative connotations of oppression
and discrimination."  The proposal seeks to discourage that in the
Center's own activities and in the wider community.

Seb explained to the board that the initial version of the proposal
prompted some discussion in the advisory board repository and
internally at the Center and as a result, the proposal was revised to
be clear that the Center's won't be "knocking on people's doors"
requesting changes, but rather publishing recommendations and
hoping they would be adopted.

Seb also said there was some uncertainty and discussion internally
about what the specifics of the guidelines would look like.  Seth: "I
would expect that there are resources out there already" that the
Center could adopt, rather than having to invent?  Seb: "Yes, of
course" they've done some research on that and will do more if the
proposal is accepted.  Darja added that any recommendations might also
evolve over time.

Ólafur brought up an example of problematic terminology in Scala.js.
Seb explained that renaming is hard because of binary compatibility
concerns. How to proceed is under discussion
[here](https://github.com/scala-js/scala-js/pull/4294).  Seb: "What we
can do is comment the method: 'For historical reasons, ...'",
something like that.  This kind of solution is "something that other
communities and projects have had to accept."

Several board members expressed interest (for themselves, and for
others at their companies) in helping develop and provide feedback on
any recommendations.

**Voting**: The proposal was accepted by unanimous vote.

## Conclusion

No "other business" topics were raised.

Adriaan suggested that we move the next meeting to January instead
of trying for December, because of the holidays; Darja agreed;
there were no objections.
