---
layout: contact
---

# Minutes of the 20th meeting of the Scala Center, Q1 2021

Minutes are [archived](https://scala.epfl.ch/records.html) on the
Scala Center website.

## Summary

No agenda was distributed in advance, but the usual meeting structure
was followed.

Scala Center activities for the past quarter focused on TODO

Staffing: TODO

More details on all this are in
[Darja's report](./TODO) on general issues and
[Seb's report](./TODO) on technical activities.

There were no new proposals this quarter.

## Date, Time and Location

The meeting took place virtually on Tuesday, March 30, 2021 at
3:00pm (UTC).

Minutes were taken by Seth Tisue (secretary).

## Attendees

Officers:

* Adriaan Moors (chairperson)
  * also board member, representing Lightbend
* Darja Jovanovic (executive director), EPFL
* SÃ©bastien Doeraene (technical director), EPFL
* Martin Odersky (technical advisor), EPFL
* Seth Tisue (secretary), Lightbend

Board members:

* Chris Kipp, Lunatech
* Maureen Elsberry, 47 Degrees
* Graham Griffiths and Alex Hurst, Goldman Sachs
* Rob Norris, community/Typelevel
* Krzysztof Romanowski, VirtusLab
* Daniela Sfregola, Morgan Stanley
* Julien Tournay, Spotify
* Bill Venners, community/Artima
* Eugene Yokota, Twitter

Apologies:

* none

Guests:

* Kris Mo, Databricks

## Proceedings

TODO

## Activities reports

Darja and Seb summarized Scala Center activities since the last
meeting.

TODO

Their remarks were largely based on their reports:

* [Darja's report](TODO)
* [Seb's report](TODO)

The following notes do not repeat the content of the reports,
but only supplement them.

TODO

## Financial report

This section was skipped, because relatively little time has passed
since the last meeting.  (The last meeting was held late; this meeting
was held on time, to get the schedule back on track.)

## Community feedback

TODO

## Other business

TODO

## Conclusion

TODO
