---
layout: contact
---

# Minutes of the 23rd meeting of the Scala Center, Q4 2021

Minutes are [archived](https://scala.epfl.ch/records.html) on the
Scala Center website.

## Summary

The following agenda was distributed to attendees:
[agenda](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/agendas/023-2021-q4.md).

TODO

Details on all this are in the directors'
[quarterly report](./2022-01-28-january-28-2022.pdf) and
[report on plans for 2022](./2022-01-28-january-28-2022-julien.pdf).

One new proposal was discussed:

* [SCP-028](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/main/proposals/028-community-delegate-terms.md): Community Delegate Terms (Rob Norris, Bill Venners)

Note that the refactoring proposal from Twitter,
[SCP-027](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/main/proposals/027-refactoring.md),
remains active but discussion of the revised version was postponed
until next meeting.

Other business discussed included TODO

## Date, Time and Location

The meeting took place virtually on Friday, January 28, 2022 at
4:00pm (UTC).

Minutes were taken by Seth Tisue (secretary).

## Attendees

Officers:

* Chris Kipp (chairperson)
  * also board member, representing Lunatech
* Darja Jovanovic (executive director), EPFL
* Sébastien Doeraene (technical director), EPFL
* Martin Odersky (technical advisor), EPFL
* Seth Tisue (secretary), Lightbend

Board members:

* Diego Alonso, 47 Degrees
* Maureen Elsberry, 47 Degrees
* Graham Griffiths, Goldman Sachs
* Rob Norris, community/Typelevel
* Krzysztof Romanowski, VirtusLab
* Daniela Sfregola, Morgan Stanley
* Claire McGinty, Spotify
* Bill Venners, community/Artima
* Eugene Yokota, Twitter

Apologies:

* Kris Mok, Databricks
* Nicolas Rémond, SwissBorg (affiliate member)
* Lukas Rytz, Lightbend
  * Seth Tisue represented Lightbend at this meeting

Guests:

* Adam Goodman, Northwestern University
* Julien Richard-Foy, EPFL

## Activities report

Darja and Seb summarized Scala Center activities since the last
meeting.

Their remarks were partly based on their quarterly report:

* [quarterly report](./2022-01-28-january-28-2022.pdf)

The following notes do not repeat the content of the report, but only
supplement it.

TODO

## Financial report

TODO

## Plans for 2022

Julien Richard-Foy, longtime employee of the Center, attended the
meeting as a guest and presented this report on the Center's plans for
2022:

* [report on plans for 2022](./2022-01-28-january-28-2022.pdf)

with special emphasis on planned activities in the first quarter of
the year.

## Proposals

### SCP-027: Refactoring

This proposal from Twitter,
[SCP-027](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/main/proposals/027-refactoring.md),
has been revised in response to feedback at the last meeting, but the
revisions were made too close to meeting time to permit proper
discussion of the revised version. We intend to return to it next
meeting.

### SCP-028: Community Delegate Terms

The
[proposal](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/main/proposals/028-community-delegate-terms.md)
was submitted by both community representatives, Bill Venners and Rob
Norris.

TODO

**Voting**: The proposal was unanimously approved.

TODO

### Past proposals

TODO

## Other business

### Scala 2

TODO

### Community feedback

TODO

## Conclusion

Since this meeting occurred somewhat late, we should aim to meet again
in late March or early April.
